<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>CHAPTER XI.Tarzan Becomes a Beast Again</h2>
			<p>For a moment Werper had stood above the sleeping ape-man, his murderous knifepoised for the fatal thrust; but fear stayed his hand. What if the first blowshould fail to drive the point to his victim’s heart? Werper shuddered incontemplation of the disastrous consequences to himself. Awakened, and evenwith a few moments of life remaining, the giant could literally tear hisassailant to pieces should he choose, and the Belgian had no doubt but thatTarzan would so choose.</p>
			<p>Again came the soft sound of padded footsteps in the reeds—closer thistime. Werper abandoned his design. Before him stretched the wide plain andescape. The jewels were in his possession. To remain longer was to risk deathat the hands of Tarzan, or the jaws of the hunter creeping ever nearer.Turning, he slunk away through the night, toward the distant forest.</p>
			<p>Tarzan slept on. Where were those uncanny, guardian powers that had formerlyrendered him immune from the dangers of surprise? Could this dull sleeper bethe alert, sensitive Tarzan of old?</p>
			<p>Perhaps the blow upon his head had numbed his senses, temporarily—who maysay? Closer crept the stealthy creature through the reeds. The rustling curtainof vegetation parted a few paces from where the sleeper lay, and the massivehead of a lion appeared. The beast surveyed the ape-man intently for a moment,then he crouched, his hind feet drawn well beneath him, his tail lashing fromside to side.</p>
			<p>It was the beating of the beast’s tail against the reeds which awakenedTarzan. Jungle folk do not awaken slowly—instantly, full consciousnessand full command of their every faculty returns to them from the depth ofprofound slumber.</p>
			<p>Even as Tarzan opened his eyes he was upon his feet, his spear grasped firmlyin his hand and ready for attack. Again was he Tarzan of the Apes, sentient,vigilant, ready.</p>
			<p>No two lions have identical characteristics, nor does the same lion invariablyact similarly under like circumstances. Whether it was surprise, fear orcaution which prompted the lion crouching ready to spring upon the man, isimmaterial—the fact remains that he did not carry out his originaldesign, he did not spring at the man at all, but, instead, wheeled and sprangback into the reeds as Tarzan arose and confronted him.</p>
			<p>The ape-man shrugged his broad shoulders and looked about for his companion.Werper was nowhere to be seen. At first Tarzan suspected that the man had beenseized and dragged off by another lion, but upon examination of the ground hesoon discovered that the Belgian had gone away alone out into the plain.</p>
			<p>For a moment he was puzzled; but presently came to the conclusion that Werperhad been frightened by the approach of the lion, and had sneaked off in terror.A sneer touched Tarzan’s lips as he pondered the man’sact—the desertion of a comrade in time of danger, and without warning.Well, if that was the sort of creature Werper was, Tarzan wished nothing moreof him. He had gone, and for all the ape-man cared, he might remainaway—Tarzan would not search for him.</p>
			<p>A hundred yards from where he stood grew a large tree, alone upon the edge ofthe reedy jungle. Tarzan made his way to it, clambered into it, and finding acomfortable crotch among its branches, reposed himself for uninterrupted sleepuntil morning.</p>
			<p>And when morning came Tarzan slept on long after the sun had risen. His mind,reverted to the primitive, was untroubled by any more serious obligations thanthose of providing sustenance, and safeguarding his life. Therefore, there wasnothing to awaken for until danger threatened, or the pangs of hunger assailed.It was the latter which eventually aroused him.</p>
			<p>Opening his eyes, he stretched his giant thews, yawned, rose and gazed abouthim through the leafy foliage of his retreat. Across the wasted meadowlands andfields of John Clayton, Lord Greystoke, Tarzan of the Apes looked, as astranger, upon the moving figures of Basuli and his braves as they preparedtheir morning meal and made ready to set out upon the expedition which Basulihad planned after discovering the havoc and disaster which had befallen theestate of his dead master.</p>
			<p>The ape-man eyed the blacks with curiosity. In the back of his brain loitered afleeting sense of familiarity with all that he saw, yet he could not connectany of the various forms of life, animate and inanimate, which had fallenwithin the range of his vision since he had emerged from the darkness of thepits of Opar, with any particular event of the past.</p>
			<p>Hazily he recalled a grim and hideous form, hairy, ferocious. A vaguetenderness dominated his savage sentiments as this phantom memory struggled forrecognition. His mind had reverted to his childhood days—it was thefigure of the giant she-ape, Kala, that he saw; but only half recognized. Hesaw, too, other grotesque, manlike forms. They were of Terkoz, Tublat, Kerchak,and a smaller, less ferocious figure, that was Neeta, the little playmate ofhis boyhood.</p>
			<p>Slowly, very slowly, as these visions of the past animated his lethargicmemory, he came to recognize them. They took definite shape and form, adjustingthemselves nicely to the various incidents of his life with which they had beenintimately connected. His boyhood among the apes spread itself in a slowpanorama before him, and as it unfolded it induced within him a mighty longingfor the companionship of the shaggy, low-browed brutes of his past.</p>
			<p>He watched the blacks scatter their cook fire and depart; but though the faceof each of them had but recently been as familiar to him as his own, theyawakened within him no recollections whatsoever.</p>
			<p>When they had gone, he descended from the tree and sought food. Out upon theplain grazed numerous herds of wild ruminants. Toward a sleek, fat bunch ofzebra he wormed his stealthy way. No intricate process of reasoning caused himto circle widely until he was down wind from his prey—he actedinstinctively. He took advantage of every form of cover as he crawled upon allfours and often flat upon his stomach toward them.</p>
			<p>A plump young mare and a fat stallion grazed nearest to him as he neared theherd. Again it was instinct which selected the former for his meat. A low bushgrew but a few yards from the unsuspecting two. The ape-man reached itsshelter. He gathered his spear firmly in his grasp. Cautiously he drew his feetbeneath him. In a single swift move he rose and cast his heavy weapon at themare’s side. Nor did he wait to note the effect of his assault, butleaped cat-like after his spear, his hunting knife in his hand.</p>
			<p>For an instant the two animals stood motionless. The tearing of the cruel barbinto her side brought a sudden scream of pain and fright from the mare, andthen they both wheeled and broke for safety; but Tarzan of the Apes, for adistance of a few yards, could equal the speed of even these, and the firststride of the mare found her overhauled, with a savage beast at her shoulder.She turned, biting and kicking at her foe. Her mate hesitated for an instant,as though about to rush to her assistance; but a backward glance revealed tohim the flying heels of the balance of the herd, and with a snort and a shakeof his head he wheeled and dashed away.</p>
			<p>Clinging with one hand to the short mane of his quarry, Tarzan struck again andagain with his knife at the unprotected heart. The result had, from the first,been inevitable. The mare fought bravely, but hopelessly, and presently sank tothe earth, her heart pierced. The ape-man placed a foot upon her carcass andraised his voice in the victory call of the Mangani. In the distance, Basulihalted as the faint notes of the hideous scream broke upon his ears.</p>
			<p>“The great apes,” he said to his companion. “It has been longsince I have heard them in the country of the Waziri. What could have broughtthem back?”</p>
			<p>Tarzan grasped his kill and dragged it to the partial seclusion of the bushwhich had hidden his own near approach, and there he squatted upon it, cut ahuge hunk of flesh from the loin and proceeded to satisfy his hunger with thewarm and dripping meat.</p>
			<p>Attracted by the shrill screams of the mare, a pair of hyenas slunk presentlyinto view. They trotted to a point a few yards from the gorging ape-man, andhalted. Tarzan looked up, bared his fighting fangs and growled. The hyenasreturned the compliment, and withdrew a couple of paces. They made no move toattack; but continued to sit at a respectful distance until Tarzan hadconcluded his meal. After the ape-man had cut a few strips from the carcass tocarry with him, he walked slowly off in the direction of the river to quenchhis thirst. His way lay directly toward the hyenas, nor did he alter his coursebecause of them.</p>
			<p>With all the lordly majesty of Numa, the lion, he strode straight toward thegrowling beasts. For a moment they held their ground, bristling and defiant;but only for a moment, and then slunk away to one side while the indifferentape-man passed them on his lordly way. A moment later they were tearing at theremains of the zebra.</p>
			<p>Back to the reeds went Tarzan, and through them toward the river. A herd ofbuffalo, startled by his approach, rose ready to charge or to fly. A great bullpawed the ground and bellowed as his bloodshot eyes discovered the intruder;but the ape-man passed across their front as though ignorant of theirexistence. The bull’s bellowing lessened to a low rumbling, he turned andscraped a horde of flies from his side with his muzzle, cast a final glance atthe ape-man and resumed his feeding. His numerous family either followed hisexample or stood gazing after Tarzan in mild-eyed curiosity, until the oppositereeds swallowed him from view.</p>
			<p>At the river, Tarzan drank his fill and bathed. During the heat of the day helay up under the shade of a tree near the ruins of his burned barns. His eyeswandered out across the plain toward the forest, and a longing for thepleasures of its mysterious depths possessed his thoughts for a considerabletime. With the next sun he would cross the open and enter the forest! There wasno hurry—there lay before him an endless vista of tomorrows with naughtto fill them but the satisfying of the appetites and caprices of the moment.</p>
			<p>The ape-man’s mind was untroubled by regret for the past, or aspirationfor the future. He could lie at full length along a swaying branch, stretchinghis giant limbs, and luxuriating in the blessed peace of utter thoughtlessness,without an apprehension or a worry to sap his nervous energy and rob him of hispeace of mind. Recalling only dimly any other existence, the ape-man was happy.Lord Greystoke had ceased to exist.</p>
			<p>For several hours Tarzan lolled upon his swaying, leafy couch until once againhunger and thirst suggested an excursion. Stretching lazily he dropped to theground and moved slowly toward the river. The game trail down which he walkedhad become by ages of use a deep, narrow trench, its walls topped on eitherside by impenetrable thicket and dense-growing trees closely interwoven withthick-stemmed creepers and lesser vines inextricably matted into two solidramparts of vegetation. Tarzan had almost reached the point where the traildebouched upon the open river bottom when he saw a family of lions approachingalong the path from the direction of the river. The ape-man countedseven—a male and two lionesses, full grown, and four young lions as largeand quite as formidable as their parents. Tarzan halted, growling, and thelions paused, the great male in the lead baring his fangs and rumbling forth awarning roar. In his hand the ape-man held his heavy spear; but he had nointention of pitting his puny weapon against seven lions; yet he stood theregrowling and roaring and the lions did likewise. It was purely an exhibition ofjungle bluff. Each was trying to frighten off the other. Neither wished to turnback and give way, nor did either at first desire to precipitate an encounter.The lions were fed sufficiently so as not to be goaded by pangs of hunger andas for Tarzan he seldom ate the meat of the carnivores; but a point of ethicswas at stake and neither side wished to back down. So they stood there facingone another, making all sorts of hideous noises the while they hurled jungleinvective back and forth. How long this bloodless duel would have persisted itis difficult to say, though eventually Tarzan would have been forced to yieldto superior numbers.</p>
			<p>There came, however, an interruption which put an end to the deadlock and itcame from Tarzan’s rear. He and the lions had been making so much noisethat neither could hear anything above their concerted bedlam, and so it wasthat Tarzan did not hear the great bulk bearing down upon him from behind untilan instant before it was upon him, and then he turned to see Buto, therhinoceros, his little, pig eyes blazing, charging madly toward him and alreadyso close that escape seemed impossible; yet so perfectly were mind and musclescoordinated in this unspoiled, primitive man that almost simultaneously withthe sense perception of the threatened danger he wheeled and hurled his spearat Buto’s chest. It was a heavy spear shod with iron, and behind it werethe giant muscles of the ape-man, while coming to meet it was the enormousweight of Buto and the momentum of his rapid rush. All that happened in theinstant that Tarzan turned to meet the charge of the irascible rhinoceros mighttake long to tell, and yet would have taxed the swiftest lens to record. As hisspear left his hand the ape-man was looking down upon the mighty horn loweredto toss him, so close was Buto to him. The spear entered the rhinoceros’neck at its junction with the left shoulder and passed almost entirely throughthe beast’s body, and at the instant that he launched it, Tarzan leapedstraight into the air alighting upon Buto’s back but escaping the mightyhorn.</p>
			<p>Then Buto espied the lions and bore madly down upon them while Tarzan of theApes leaped nimbly into the tangled creepers at one side of the trail. Thefirst lion met Buto’s charge and was tossed high over the back of themaddened brute, torn and dying, and then the six remaining lions were upon therhinoceros, rending and tearing the while they were being gored or trampled.From the safety of his perch Tarzan watched the royal battle with the keenestinterest, for the more intelligent of the jungle folk are interested in suchencounters. They are to them what the racetrack and the prize ring, the theaterand the movies are to us. They see them often; but always they enjoy them forno two are precisely alike.</p>
			<p>For a time it seemed to Tarzan that Buto, the rhinoceros, would prove victor inthe gory battle. Already had he accounted for four of the seven lions and badlywounded the three remaining when in a momentary lull in the encounter he sanklimply to his knees and rolled over upon his side. Tarzan’s spear haddone its work. It was the man-made weapon which killed the great beast thatmight easily have survived the assault of seven mighty lions, forTarzan’s spear had pierced the great lungs, and Buto, with victory almostin sight, succumbed to internal hemorrhage.</p>
			<p>Then Tarzan came down from his sanctuary and as the wounded lions, growling,dragged themselves away, the ape-man cut his spear from the body of Buto,hacked off a steak and vanished into the jungle. The episode was over. It hadbeen all in the day’s work—something which you and I might talkabout for a lifetime Tarzan dismissed from his mind the moment that the scenepassed from his sight.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
