<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter xxiii: A Night of Terror</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-23" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2><span epub:type="label">Chapter</span> <span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman"><em>xxiii</em></span></h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Night of Terror</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>To Jane Clayton, waiting in the tree where Werper had placed her, it seemedthat the long night would never end, yet end it did at last, and within an hourof the coming of dawn her spirits leaped with renewed hope at sight of asolitary horseman approaching along the trail.</p>
			<p>The flowing burnoose, with its loose hood, hid both the face and the figure ofthe rider; but that it was <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Frecoult the girl well knew, since he had beengarbed as an Arab, and he alone might be expected to seek her hiding place.</p>
			<p>That which she saw relieved the strain of the long night vigil; but there wasmuch that she did not see. She did not see the black face beneath the whitehood, nor the file of ebon horsemen beyond the trail’s bend riding slowlyin the wake of their leader. These things she did not see at first, and so sheleaned downward toward the approaching rider, a cry of welcome forming in herthroat.</p>
			<p>At the first word the man looked up, reining in in surprise, and as she saw theblack face of Abdul Mourak, the Abyssinian, she shrank back in terror among thebranches; but it was too late. The man had seen her, and now he called to herto descend. At first she refused; but when a dozen black cavalrymen drew upbehind their leader, and at Abdul Mourak’s command one of them started toclimb the tree after her she realized that resistance was futile, and cameslowly down to stand upon the ground before this new captor and plead her causein the name of justice and humanity.</p>
			<p>Angered by recent defeat, and by the loss of the gold, the jewels, and hisprisoners, Abdul Mourak was in no mood to be influenced by any appeal to thosesofter sentiments to which, as a matter of fact, he was almost a stranger evenunder the most favourable conditions.</p>
			<p>He looked for degradation and possible death in punishment for his failures andhis misfortunes when he should have returned to his native land and made hisreport to Menelek; but an acceptable gift might temper the wrath of theemperor, and surely this fair flower of another race should be gratefullyreceived by the black ruler!</p>
			<p>When Jane Clayton had concluded her appeal, Abdul Mourak replied briefly thathe would promise her protection; but that he must take her to his emperor. Thegirl did not need ask him why, and once again hope died within her breast.Resignedly she permitted herself to be lifted to a seat behind one of thetroopers, and again, under new masters, her journey was resumed toward what shenow began to believe was her inevitable fate.</p>
			<p>Abdul Mourak, bereft of his guides by the battle he had waged against theraiders, and himself unfamiliar with the country, had wandered far from thetrail he should have followed, and as a result had made but little progresstoward the north since the beginning of his flight. Today he was beating towardthe west in the hope of coming upon a village where he might obtain guides; butnight found him still as far from a realization of his hopes as had the risingsun.</p>
			<p>It was a dispirited company which went into camp, waterless and hungry, in thedense jungle. Attracted by the horses, lions roared about the boma, and totheir hideous din was added the shrill neighs of the terror-stricken beaststhey hunted. There was little sleep for man or beast, and the sentries weredoubled that there might be enough on duty both to guard against the suddencharge of an overbold, or overhungry lion, and to keep the fire blazing whichwas an even more effectual barrier against them than the thorny boma.</p>
			<p>It was well past midnight, and as yet Jane Clayton, notwithstanding that shehad passed a sleepless night the night before, had scarcely more than dozed. Asense of impending danger seemed to hang like a black pall over the camp. Theveteran troopers of the black emperor were nervous and ill at ease. AbdulMourak left his blankets a dozen times to pace restlessly back and forthbetween the tethered horses and the crackling fire. The girl could see hisgreat frame silhouetted against the lurid glare of the flames, and she guessedfrom the quick, nervous movements of the man that he was afraid.</p>
			<p>The roaring of the lions rose in sudden fury until the earth trembled to thehideous chorus. The horses shrilled their neighs of terror as they lay backupon their halter ropes in their mad endeavors to break loose. A trooper,braver than his fellows, leaped among the kicking, plunging, fear-maddenedbeasts in a futile attempt to quiet them. A lion, large, and fierce, andcourageous, leaped almost to the boma, full in the bright light from the fire.A sentry raised his piece and fired, and the little leaden pellet unstopperedthe vials of hell upon the terror-stricken camp.</p>
			<p>The shot ploughed a deep and painful furrow in the lion’s side, arousingall the bestial fury of the little brain; but abating not a whit the power andvigor of the great body.</p>
			<p>Unwounded, the boma and the flames might have turned him back; but now the painand the rage wiped caution from his mind, and with a loud, and angry roar hetopped the barrier with an easy leap and was among the horses.</p>
			<p>What had been pandemonium before became now an indescribable tumult of hideoussound. The stricken horse upon which the lion leaped shrieked out its terrorand its agony. Several about it broke their tethers and plunged madly about thecamp. Men leaped from their blankets and with guns ready ran toward the picketline, and then from the jungle beyond the boma a dozen lions, emboldened by theexample of their fellow charged fearlessly upon the camp.</p>
			<p>Singly and in twos and threes they leaped the boma, until the little enclosurewas filled with cursing men and screaming horses battling for their lives withthe green-eyed devils of the jungle.</p>
			<p>With the charge of the first lion, Jane Clayton had scrambled to her feet, andnow she stood horror-struck at the scene of savage slaughter that swirled andeddied about her. Once a bolting horse knocked her down, and a moment later alion, leaping in pursuit of another terror-stricken animal, brushed her soclosely that she was again thrown from her feet.</p>
			<p>Amidst the cracking of the rifles and the growls of the carnivora rose thedeath screams of stricken men and horses as they were dragged down by theblood-mad cats. The leaping carnivora and the plunging horses, prevented anyconcerted action by the Abyssinians⁠—it was every man forhimself⁠—and in the melee, the defenseless woman was either forgotten orignored by her black captors. A score of times was her life menaced by charginglions, by plunging horses, or by the wildly fired bullets of the frightenedtroopers, yet there was no chance of escape, for now with the fiendish cunningof their kind, the tawny hunters commenced to circle about their prey, hemmingthem within a ring of mighty, yellow fangs, and sharp, long talons. Again andagain an individual lion would dash suddenly among the frightened men andhorses, and occasionally a horse, goaded to frenzy by pain or terror, succeededin racing safely through the circling lions, leaping the boma, and escapinginto the jungle; but for the men and the woman no such escape was possible.</p>
			<p>A horse, struck by a stray bullet, fell beside Jane Clayton, a lion leapedacross the expiring beast full upon the breast of a black trooper just beyond.The man clubbed his rifle and struck futilely at the broad head, and then hewas down and the carnivore was standing above him.</p>
			<p>Shrieking out his terror, the soldier clawed with puny fingers at the shaggybreast in vain endeavor to push away the grinning jaws. The lion lowered hishead, the gaping fangs closed with a single sickening crunch upon thefear-distorted face, and turning strode back across the body of the dead horsedragging his limp and bloody burden with him.</p>
			<p>Wide-eyed the girl stood watching. She saw the carnivore step upon the corpse,stumblingly, as the grisly thing swung between its forepaws, and her eyesremained fixed in fascination while the beast passed within a few paces of her.</p>
			<p>The interference of the body seemed to enrage the lion. He shook the inanimateclay venomously. He growled and roared hideously at the dead, insensate thing,and then he dropped it and raised his head to look about in search of someliving victim upon which to wreak his ill temper. His yellow eyes fastenedthemselves balefully upon the figure of the girl, the bristling lips raised,disclosing the grinning fangs. A terrific roar broke from the savage throat,and the great beast crouched to spring upon this new and helpless victim.</p>
			<p class="p2">Quiet had fallen early upon the camp where Tarzan and Werper lay securelybound. Two nervous sentries paced their beats, their eyes rolling often towardthe impenetrable shadows of the gloomy jungle. The others slept or tried tosleep⁠—all but the ape-man. Silently and powerfully he strained at thebonds which fettered his wrists.</p>
			<p>The muscles knotted beneath the smooth, brown skin of his arms and shoulders,the veins stood out upon his temples from the force of his exertions⁠—astrand parted, another and another, and one hand was free. Then from the junglecame a low guttural, and the ape-man became suddenly a silent, rigid statue,with ears and nostrils straining to span the black void where his eyesightcould not reach.</p>
			<p>Again came the uncanny sound from the thick verdure beyond the camp. A sentryhalted abruptly, straining his eyes into the gloom. The kinky wool upon hishead stiffened and raised. He called to his comrade in a hoarse whisper.</p>
			<p>“Did you hear it?” he asked.</p>
			<p>The other came closer, trembling.</p>
			<p>“Hear what?”</p>
			<p>Again was the weird sound repeated, followed almost immediately by a similarand answering sound from the camp. The sentries drew close together, watchingthe black spot from which the voice seemed to come.</p>
			<p>Trees overhung the boma at this point which was upon the opposite side of thecamp from them. They dared not approach. Their terror even prevented them fromarousing their fellows⁠—they could only stand in frozen fear and watch forthe fearsome apparition they momentarily expected to see leap from the jungle.</p>
			<p>Nor had they long to wait. A dim, bulky form dropped lightly from the branchesof a tree into the camp. At sight of it one of the sentries recovered commandof his muscles and his voice. Screaming loudly to awaken the sleeping camp, heleaped toward the flickering watch fire and threw a mass of brush upon it.</p>
			<p>The white officer and the black soldiers sprang from their blankets. The flamesleaped high upon the rejuvenated fire, lighting the entire camp, and theawakened men shrank back in superstitious terror from the sight that met theirfrightened and astonished vision.</p>
			<p>A dozen huge and hairy forms loomed large beneath the trees at the far side ofthe enclosure. The white giant, one hand freed, had struggled to his knees andwas calling to the frightful, nocturnal visitors in a hideous medley of bestialgutturals, barkings and growlings.</p>
			<p>Werper had managed to sit up. He, too, saw the savage faces of the approachinganthropoids and scarcely knew whether to be relieved or terror-stricken.</p>
			<p>Growling, the great apes leaped forward toward Tarzan and Werper. Chulk ledthem. The Belgian officer called to his men to fire upon the intruders; but theNegroes held back, filled as they were with superstitious terror of the hairytreemen, and with the conviction that the white giant who could thus summon thebeasts of the jungle to his aid was more than human.</p>
			<p>Drawing his own weapon, the officer fired, and Tarzan fearing the effect of thenoise upon his really timid friends called to them to hasten and fulfill hiscommands.</p>
			<p>A couple of the apes turned and fled at the sound of the firearm; but Chulk anda half dozen others waddled rapidly forward, and, following the ape-man’sdirections, seized both him and Werper and bore them off toward the jungle.</p>
			<p>By dint of threats, reproaches and profanity the Belgian officer succeeded inpersuading his trembling command to fire a volley after the retreating apes. Aragged, straggling volley it was, but at least one of its bullets found a mark,for as the jungle closed about the hairy rescuers, Chulk, who bore Werperacross one broad shoulder, staggered and fell.</p>
			<p>In an instant he was up again; but the Belgian guessed from his unsteady gaitthat he was hard hit. He lagged far behind the others, and it was severalminutes after they had halted at Tarzan’s command before he came slowlyup to them, reeling from side to side, and at last falling again beneath theweight of his burden and the shock of his wound.</p>
			<p>As Chulk went down he dropped Werper, so that the latter fell face downwardwith the body of the ape lying half across him. In this position the Belgianfelt something resting against his hands, which were still bound at hisback⁠—something that was not a part of the hairy body of the ape.</p>
			<p>Mechanically the man’s fingers felt of the object resting almost in theirgrasp⁠—it was a soft pouch, filled with small, hard particles. Werpergasped in wonderment as recognition filtered through the incredulity of hismind. It was impossible, and yet⁠—it was true!</p>
			<p>Feverishly he strove to remove the pouch from the ape and transfer it to hisown possession; but the restricted radius to which his bonds held his handsprevented this, though he did succeed in tucking the pouch with its preciouscontents inside the waist band of his trousers.</p>
			<p>Tarzan, sitting at a short distance, was busy with the remaining knots of thecords which bound him. Presently he flung aside the last of them and rose tohis feet. Approaching Werper he knelt beside him. For a moment he examined theape.</p>
			<p>“Quite dead,” he announced. “It is too bad⁠—he was asplendid creature,” and then he turned to the work of liberating theBelgian.</p>
			<p>He freed his hands first, and then commenced upon the knots at his ankles.</p>
			<p>“I can do the rest,” said the Belgian. “I have a smallpocketknife which they overlooked when they searched me,” and in this wayhe succeeded in ridding himself of the ape-man’s attentions that he mightfind and open his little knife and cut the thong which fastened the pouch aboutChulk’s shoulder, and transfer it from his waist band to the breast ofhis shirt. Then he rose and approached Tarzan.</p>
			<p>Once again had avarice claimed him. Forgotten were the good intentions whichthe confidence of Jane Clayton in his honor had awakened. What she had done,the little pouch had undone. How it had come upon the person of the great ape,Werper could not imagine, unless it had been that the anthropoid had witnessedhis fight with Achmet Zek, seen the Arab with the pouch and taken it away fromhim; but that this pouch contained the jewels of Opar, Werper was positive, andthat was all that interested him greatly.</p>
			<p>“Now,” said the ape-man, “keep your promise to me. Lead me tothe spot where you last saw my wife.”</p>
			<p>It was slow work pushing through the jungle in the dead of night behind theslow-moving Belgian. The ape-man chafed at the delay, but the European couldnot swing through the trees as could his more agile and muscular companions,and so the speed of all was limited to that of the slowest.</p>
			<p>The apes trailed out behind the two white men for a matter of a few miles; butpresently their interest lagged, the foremost of them halted in a little gladeand the others stopped at his side. There they sat peering from beneath theirshaggy brows at the figures of the two men forging steadily ahead, until thelatter disappeared in the leafy trail beyond the clearing. Then an ape sought acomfortable couch beneath a tree, and one by one the others followed hisexample, so that Werper and Tarzan continued their journey alone; nor was thelatter either surprised or concerned.</p>
			<p>The two had gone but a short distance beyond the glade where the apes haddeserted them, when the roaring of distant lions fell upon their ears. Theape-man paid no attention to the familiar sounds until the crack of a riflecame faintly from the same direction, and when this was followed by the shrillneighing of horses, and an almost continuous fusillade of shots intermingledwith increased and savage roaring of a large troop of lions, he becameimmediately concerned.</p>
			<p>“Someone is having trouble over there,” he said, turning towardWerper. “I’ll have to go to them⁠—they may be friends.”</p>
			<p>“Your wife might be among them,” suggested the Belgian, for sincehe had again come into possession of the pouch he had become fearful andsuspicious of the ape-man, and in his mind had constantly revolved many plansfor eluding this giant Englishman, who was at once his savior and his captor.</p>
			<p>At the suggestion Tarzan started as though struck with a whip.</p>
			<p>“God!” he cried, “she might be, and the lions are attackingthem⁠—they are in the camp. I can tell from the screams of thehorses⁠—and there! that was the cry of a man in his death agonies. Stayhere man⁠—I will come back for you. I must go first to them,” andswinging into a tree the lithe figure swung rapidly off into the night with thespeed and silence of a disembodied spirit.</p>
			<p>For a moment Werper stood where the ape-man had left him. Then a cunning smilecrossed his lips. “Stay here?” he asked himself. “Stay hereand wait until you return to find and take these jewels from me? Not I, myfriend, not I,” and turning abruptly eastward Albert Werper passedthrough the foliage of a hanging vine and out of the sight of hisfellow-man⁠—forever.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
