<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter xviii: The Fight For the Treasure</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2><span epub:type="label">Chapter</span> <span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman"><em>xviii</em></span></h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Fight For the Treasure</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>It was morning before Tarzan could bring himself to a realization of thepossibility of failure of his quest, and even then he would only admit thatsuccess was but delayed. He would eat and sleep, and then set forth again. Thejungle was wide; but wide too were the experience and cunning of Tarzan. Taglatmight travel far; but Tarzan would find him in the end, though he had to searchevery tree in the mighty forest.</p>
			<p>Soliloquizing thus, the ape-man followed the spoor of Bara, the deer, theunfortunate upon which he had decided to satisfy his hunger. For half an hourthe trail led the ape-man toward the east along a well-marked game path, whensuddenly, to the stalker’s astonishment, the quarry broke into sight,racing madly back along the narrow way straight toward the hunter.</p>
			<p>Tarzan, who had been following along the trail, leaped so quickly to theconcealing verdure at the side that the deer was still unaware of the presenceof an enemy in this direction, and while the animal was still some distanceaway, the ape-man swung into the lower branches of the tree which overhung thetrail. There he crouched, a savage beast of prey, awaiting the coming of itsvictim.</p>
			<p>What had frightened the deer into so frantic a retreat, Tarzan did notknow⁠—Numa, the lion, perhaps, or Sheeta, the panther; but whatsoever itwas mattered little to Tarzan of the Apes⁠—he was ready and willing todefend his kill against any other denizen of the jungle. If he were unable todo it by means of physical prowess, he had at his command another and a greaterpower⁠—his shrewd intelligence.</p>
			<p>And so, on came the running deer, straight into the jaws of death. The ape-manturned so that his back was toward the approaching animal. He poised with bentknees upon the gently swaying limb above the trail, timing with keen ears thenearing hoof beats of frightened Bara.</p>
			<p>In a moment the victim flashed beneath the limb and at the same instant theape-man above sprang out and down upon its back. The weight of the man’sbody carried the deer to the ground. It stumbled forward once in a futileeffort to rise, and then mighty muscles dragged its head far back, gave theneck a vicious wrench, and Bara was dead.</p>
			<p>Quick had been the killing, and equally quick were the ape-man’ssubsequent actions, for who might know what manner of killer pursued Bara, orhow close at hand he might be? Scarce had the neck of the victim snapped thanthe carcass was hanging over one of Tarzan’s broad shoulders, and aninstant later the ape-man was perched once more among the lower branches of atree above the trail, his keen, gray eyes scanning the pathway down which thedeer had fled.</p>
			<p>Nor was it long before the cause of Bara’s fright became evident toTarzan, for presently came the unmistakable sounds of approaching horsemen.Dragging his kill after him the ape-man ascended to the middle terrace, andsettling himself comfortably in the crotch of a tree where he could still viewthe trail beneath, cut a juicy steak from the deer’s loin, and buryinghis strong, white teeth in the hot flesh proceeded to enjoy the fruits of hisprowess and his cunning.</p>
			<p>Nor did he neglect the trail beneath while he satisfied his hunger. His sharpeyes saw the muzzle of the leading horse as it came into view around a bend inthe tortuous trail, and one by one they scrutinized the riders as they passedbeneath him in single file.</p>
			<p>Among them came one whom Tarzan recognized, but so schooled was the ape-man inthe control of his emotions that no slightest change of expression, much lessany hysterical demonstration that might have revealed his presence, betrayedthe fact of his inward excitement.</p>
			<p>Beneath him, as unconscious of his presence as were the Abyssinians before andbehind him, rode Albert Werper, while the ape-man scrutinized the Belgian forsome sign of the pouch which he had stolen.</p>
			<p>As the Abyssinians rode toward the south, a giant figure hovered ever upontheir trail⁠—a huge, almost naked white man, who carried the bloodycarcass of a deer upon his shoulders, for Tarzan knew that he might not haveanother opportunity to hunt for some time if he were to follow the Belgian.</p>
			<p>To endeavor to snatch him from the midst of the armed horsemen, not even Tarzanwould attempt other than in the last extremity, for the way of the wild is theway of caution and cunning, unless they be aroused to rashness by pain oranger.</p>
			<p>So the Abyssinians and the Belgian marched southward and Tarzan of the Apesswung silently after them through the swaying branches of the middle terrace.</p>
			<p>A two days’ march brought them to a level plain beyond which laymountains⁠—a plain which Tarzan remembered and which aroused within himvague half memories and strange longings. Out upon the plain the horsemen rode,and at a safe distance behind them crept the ape-man, taking advantage of suchcover as the ground afforded.</p>
			<p>Beside a charred pile of timbers the Abyssinians halted, and Tarzan, sneakingclose and concealing himself in nearby shrubbery, watched them in wonderment.He saw them digging up the earth, and he wondered if they had hidden meat therein the past and now had come for it. Then he recalled how he had buried hispretty pebbles, and the suggestion that had caused him to do it. They weredigging for the things the blacks had buried here!</p>
			<p>Presently he saw them uncover a dirty, yellow object, and he witnessed the joyof Werper and of Abdul Mourak as the grimy object was exposed to view. One byone they unearthed many similar pieces, all of the same uniform, dirty yellow,until a pile of them lay upon the ground, a pile which Abdul Mourak fondled andpetted in an ecstasy of greed.</p>
			<p>Something stirred in the ape-man’s mind as he looked long upon the goldeningots. Where had he seen such before? What were they? Why did these Tarmanganicovet them so greatly? To whom did they belong?</p>
			<p>He recalled the black men who had buried them. The things must be theirs.Werper was stealing them as he had stolen Tarzan’s pouch of pebbles. Theape-man’s eyes blazed in anger. He would like to find the black men andlead them against these thieves. He wondered where their village might be.</p>
			<p>As all these things ran through the active mind, a party of men moved out ofthe forest at the edge of the plain and advanced toward the ruins of the burnedbungalow.</p>
			<p>Abdul Mourak, always watchful, was the first to see them, but already they werehalfway across the open. He called to his men to mount and hold themselves inreadiness, for in the heart of Africa who may know whether a strange host befriend or foe?</p>
			<p>Werper, swinging into his saddle, fastened his eyes upon the newcomers, then,white and trembling he turned toward Abdul Mourak.</p>
			<p>“It is Achmet Zek and his raiders,” he whispered. “They arecome for the gold.”</p>
			<p>It must have been at about the same instant that Achmet Zek discovered the pileof yellow ingots and realized the actuality of what he had already feared sincefirst his eyes had alighted upon the party beside the ruins of theEnglishman’s bungalow. Someone had forestalled him⁠—another had comefor the treasure ahead of him.</p>
			<p>The Arab was crazed by rage. Recently everything had gone against him. He hadlost the jewels, the Belgian, and for the second time he had lost theEnglishwoman. Now someone had come to rob him of this treasure which he hadthought as safe from disturbance here as though it never had been mined.</p>
			<p>He cared not whom the thieves might be. They would not give up the gold withouta battle, of that he was certain, and with a wild whoop and a command to hisfollowers, Achmet Zek put spurs to his horse and dashed down upon theAbyssinians, and after him, waving their long guns above their heads, yellingand cursing, came his motley horde of cutthroat followers.</p>
			<p>The men of Abdul Mourak met them with a volley which emptied a few saddles, andthen the raiders were among them, and sword, pistol and musket, each was doingits most hideous and bloody work.</p>
			<p>Achmet Zek, spying Werper at the first charge, bore down upon the Belgian, andthe latter, terrified by contemplation of the fate he deserved, turned hishorse’s head and dashed madly away in an effort to escape. Shouting to alieutenant to take command, and urging him upon pain of death to dispatch theAbyssinians and bring the gold back to his camp, Achmet Zek set off across theplain in pursuit of the Belgian, his wicked nature unable to forego thepleasures of revenge, even at the risk of sacrificing the treasure.</p>
			<p>As the pursued and the pursuer raced madly toward the distant forest the battlebehind them raged with bloody savageness. No quarter was asked or given byeither the ferocious Abyssinians or the murderous cutthroats of Achmet Zek.</p>
			<p>From the concealment of the shrubbery Tarzan watched the sanguinary conflictwhich so effectually surrounded him that he found no loophole through which hemight escape to follow Werper and the Arab chief.</p>
			<p>The Abyssinians were formed in a circle which included Tarzan’s position,and around and into them galloped the yelling raiders, now darting away, nowcharging in to deliver thrusts and cuts with their curved swords.</p>
			<p>Numerically the men of Achmet Zek were superior, and slowly but surely thesoldiers of Menelek were being exterminated. To Tarzan the result wasimmaterial. He watched with but a single purpose⁠—to escape the ring ofblood-mad fighters and be away after the Belgian and his pouch.</p>
			<p>When he had first discovered Werper upon the trail where he had slain Bara, hehad thought that his eyes must be playing him false, so certain had he beenthat the thief had been slain and devoured by Numa; but after following thedetachment for two days, with his keen eyes always upon the Belgian, he nolonger doubted the identity of the man, though he was put to it to explain theidentity of the mutilated corpse he had supposed was the man he sought.</p>
			<p>As he crouched in hiding among the unkempt shrubbery which so short a whilesince had been the delight and pride of the wife he no longer recalled, an Araband an Abyssinian wheeled their mounts close to his position as they slashed ateach other with their swords.</p>
			<p>Step by step the Arab beat back his adversary until the latter’s horseall but trod upon the ape-man, and then a vicious cut clove the blackwarrior’s skull, and the corpse toppled backward almost upon Tarzan.</p>
			<p>As the Abyssinian tumbled from his saddle the possibility of escape which wasrepresented by the riderless horse electrified the ape-man to instant action.Before the frightened beast could gather himself for flight a naked giant wasastride his back. A strong hand had grasped his bridle rein, and the surprisedArab discovered a new foe in the saddle of him, whom he had slain.</p>
			<p>But this enemy wielded no sword, and his spear and bow remained upon his back.The Arab, recovered from his first surprise, dashed in with raised sword toannihilate this presumptuous stranger. He aimed a mighty blow at theape-man’s head, a blow which swung harmlessly through thin air as Tarzanducked from its path, and then the Arab felt the other’s horse brushinghis leg, a great arm shot out and encircled his waist, and before he couldrecover himself he was dragged from his saddle, and forming a shield for hisantagonist was borne at a mad run straight through the encircling ranks of hisfellows.</p>
			<p>Just beyond them he was tossed aside upon the ground, and the last he saw ofhis strange foeman the latter was galloping off across the plain in thedirection of the forest at its farther edge.</p>
			<p>For another hour the battle raged nor did it cease until the last of theAbyssinians lay dead upon the ground, or had galloped off toward the north inflight. But a handful of men escaped, among them Abdul Mourak.</p>
			<p>The victorious raiders collected about the pile of golden ingots which theAbyssinians had uncovered, and there awaited the return of their leader. Theirexultation was slightly tempered by the glimpse they had had of the strangeapparition of the naked white man galloping away upon the horse of one of theirfoemen and carrying a companion who was now among them expatiating upon thesuperhuman strength of the ape-man. None of them there but was familiar withthe name and fame of Tarzan of the Apes, and the fact that they had recognizedthe white giant as the ferocious enemy of the wrongdoers of the jungle, addedto their terror, for they had been assured that Tarzan was dead.</p>
			<p>Naturally superstitious, they fully believed that they had seen the disembodiedspirit of the dead man, and now they cast fearful glances about them inexpectation of the ghost’s early return to the scene of the ruin they hadinflicted upon him during their recent raid upon his home, and discussed inaffrighted whispers the probable nature of the vengeance which the spirit wouldinflict upon them should he return to find them in possession of his gold.</p>
			<p>As they conversed their terror grew, while from the concealment of the reedsalong the river below them a small party of naked, black warriors watched theirevery move. From the heights beyond the river these black men had heard thenoise of the conflict, and creeping warily down to the stream had forded it andadvanced through the reeds until they were in a position to watch every move ofthe combatants.</p>
			<p>For a half hour the raiders awaited Achmet Zek’s return, their fear ofthe earlier return of the ghost of Tarzan constantly undermining their loyaltyto and fear of their chief. Finally one among them voiced the desires of allwhen he announced that he intended riding forth toward the forest in search ofAchmet Zek. Instantly every man of them sprang to his mount.</p>
			<p>“The gold will be safe here,” cried one. “We have killed theAbyssinians and there are no others to carry it away. Let us ride in search ofAchmet Zek!”</p>
			<p>And a moment later, amidst a cloud of dust, the raiders were galloping madlyacross the plain, and out from the concealment of the reeds along the river,crept a party of black warriors toward the spot where the golden ingots of Oparlay piled on the ground.</p>
			<p>Werper had still been in advance of Achmet Zek when he reached the forest; butthe latter, better mounted, was gaining upon him. Riding with the recklesscourage of desperation the Belgian urged his mount to greater speed even withinthe narrow confines of the winding, game trail that the beast was following.</p>
			<p>Behind him he could hear the voice of Achmet Zek crying to him to halt; butWerper only dug the spurs deeper into the bleeding sides of his panting mount.Two hundred yards within the forest a broken branch lay across the trail. Itwas a small thing that a horse might ordinarily take in his natural stridewithout noticing its presence; but Werper’s horse was jaded, his feetwere heavy with weariness, and as the branch caught between his front legs hestumbled, was unable to recover himself, and went down, sprawling in the trail.</p>
			<p>Werper, going over his head, rolled a few yards farther on, scrambled to hisfeet and ran back. Seizing the reins he tugged to drag the beast to his feet;but the animal would not or could not rise, and as the Belgian cursed andstruck at him, Achmet Zek appeared in view.</p>
			<p>Instantly the Belgian ceased his efforts with the dying animal at his feet, andseizing his rifle, dropped behind the horse and fired at the oncoming Arab.</p>
			<p>His bullet, going low, struck Achmet Zek’s horse in the breast, bringinghim down a hundred yards from where Werper lay preparing to fire a second shot.</p>
			<p>The Arab, who had gone down with his mount, was standing astride him, andseeing the Belgian’s strategic position behind his fallen horse, lost notime in taking up a similar one behind his own.</p>
			<p>And there the two lay, alternately firing at and cursing each other, while frombehind the Arab, Tarzan of the Apes approached to the edge of the forest. Herehe heard the occasional shots of the duelists, and choosing the safer andswifter avenue of the forest branches to the uncertain transportation affordedby a half-broken Abyssinian pony, took to the trees.</p>
			<p>Keeping to one side of the trail, the ape-man came presently to a point wherehe could look down in comparative safety upon the fighters. First one and thenthe other would partially raise himself above his breastwork of horseflesh,fire his weapon and immediately drop flat behind his shelter, where he wouldreload and repeat the act a moment later.</p>
			<p>Werper had but little ammunition, having been hastily armed by Abdul Mourakfrom the body of one of the first of the Abyssinians who had fallen in thefight about the pile of ingots, and now he realized that soon he would haveused his last bullet, and be at the mercy of the Arab⁠—a mercy with whichhe was well acquainted.</p>
			<p>Facing both death and despoilment of his treasure, the Belgian cast about forsome plan of escape, and the only one that appealed to him as containing even aremote possibility of success hinged upon the chance of bribing Achmet Zek.</p>
			<p>Werper had fired all but a single cartridge, when, during a lull in thefighting, he called aloud to his opponent.</p>
			<p>“Achmet Zek,” he cried, “Allah alone knows which one of usmay leave our bones to rot where he lies upon this trail today if we keep upour foolish battle. You wish the contents of the pouch I wear about my waist,and I wish my life and my liberty even more than I do the jewels. Let us each,then, take that which he most desires and go our separate ways in peace. I willlay the pouch upon the carcass of my horse, where you may see it, and you, inturn, will lay your gun upon your horse, with butt toward me. Then I will goaway, leaving the pouch to you, and you will let me go in safety. I want onlymy life, and my freedom.”</p>
			<p>The Arab thought in silence for a moment. Then he spoke. His reply wasinfluenced by the fact that he had expended his last shot.</p>
			<p>“Go your way, then,” he growled, “leaving the pouch in plainsight behind you. See, I lay my gun thus, with the butt toward you. Go.”</p>
			<p>Werper removed the pouch from about his waist. Sorrowfully and affectionatelyhe let his fingers press the hard outlines of the contents. Ah, if he couldextract a little handful of the precious stones! But Achmet Zek was standingnow, his eagle eyes commanding a plain view of the Belgian and his every act.</p>
			<p>Regretfully Werper laid the pouch, its contents undisturbed, upon the body ofhis horse, rose, and taking his rifle with him, backed slowly down the trailuntil a turn hid him from the view of the watchful Arab.</p>
			<p>Even then Achmet Zek did not advance, fearful as he was of some such treacheryas he himself might have been guilty of under like circumstances; nor were hissuspicions groundless, for the Belgian, no sooner had he passed out of therange of the Arab’s vision, halted behind the bole of a tree, where hestill commanded an unobstructed view of his dead horse and the pouch, andraising his rifle covered the spot where the other’s body must appearwhen he came forward to seize the treasure.</p>
			<p>But Achmet Zek was no fool to expose himself to the blackened honor of a thiefand a murderer. Taking his long gun with him, he left the trail, entering therank and tangled vegetation which walled it, and crawling slowly forward onhands and knees he paralleled the trail; but never for an instant was his bodyexposed to the rifle of the hidden assassin.</p>
			<p>Thus Achmet Zek advanced until he had come opposite the dead horse of hisenemy. The pouch lay there in full view, while a short distance along thetrail, Werper waited in growing impatience and nervousness, wondering why theArab did not come to claim his reward.</p>
			<p>Presently he saw the muzzle of a rifle appear suddenly and mysteriously a fewinches above the pouch, and before he could realize the cunning trick that theArab had played upon him the sight of the weapon was adroitly hooked into therawhide thong which formed the carrying strap of the pouch, and the latter wasdrawn quickly from his view into the dense foliage at the trail’s side.</p>
			<p>Not for an instant had the raider exposed a square inch of his body, and Werperdared not fire his one remaining shot unless every chance of a successful hitwas in his favor.</p>
			<p>Chuckling to himself, Achmet Zek withdrew a few paces farther into the jungle,for he was as positive that Werper was waiting nearby for a chance to pot himas though his eyes had penetrated the jungle trees to the figure of the hidingBelgian, fingering his rifle behind the bole of the buttressed giant.</p>
			<p>Werper did not dare advance⁠—his cupidity would not permit him to depart,and so he stood there, his rifle ready in his hands, his eyes watching thetrail before him with cat-like intensity.</p>
			<p>But there was another who had seen the pouch and recognized it, who did advancewith Achmet Zek, hovering above him, as silent and as sure as death itself, andas the Arab, finding a little spot less overgrown with bushes than he had yetencountered, prepared to gloat his eyes upon the contents of the pouch, Tarzanpaused directly above him, intent upon the same object.</p>
			<p>Wetting his thin lips with his tongue, Achmet Zek loosened the tie stringswhich closed the mouth of the pouch, and cupping one claw-like hand pouredforth a portion of the contents into his palm.</p>
			<p>A single look he took at the stones lying in his hand. His eyes narrowed, acurse broke from his lips, and he hurled the small objects upon the ground,disdainfully. Quickly he emptied the balance of the contents until he hadscanned each separate stone, and as he dumped them all upon the ground andstamped upon them his rage grew until the muscles of his face worked indemon-like fury, and his fingers clenched until his nails bit into the flesh.</p>
			<p>Above, Tarzan watched in wonderment. He had been curious to discover what allthe powwow about his pouch had meant. He wanted to see what the Arab would doafter the other had gone away, leaving the pouch behind him, and, havingsatisfied his curiosity, he would then have pounced upon Achmet Zek and takenthe pouch and his pretty pebbles away from him, for did they not belong toTarzan?</p>
			<p>He saw the Arab now throw aside the empty pouch, and grasping his long gun bythe barrel, clublike, sneak stealthily through the jungle beside the trailalong which Werper had gone.</p>
			<p>As the man disappeared from his view, Tarzan dropped to the ground andcommenced gathering up the spilled contents of the pouch, and the moment thathe obtained his first near view of the scattered pebbles he understood the rageof the Arab, for instead of the glittering and scintillating gems which hadfirst caught and held the attention of the ape-man, the pouch now contained buta collection of ordinary river pebbles.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
