<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>CHAPTER XV.The Flight of Werper</h2>
			<p>After Werper had arranged the dummy in his bed, and sneaked out into thedarkness of the village beneath the rear wall of his tent, he had gone directlyto the hut in which Jane Clayton was held captive.</p>
			<p>Before the doorway squatted a black sentry. Werper approached him boldly, spokea few words in his ear, handed him a package of tobacco, and passed into thehut. The black grinned and winked as the European disappeared within thedarkness of the interior.</p>
			<p>The Belgian, being one of Achmet Zek’s principal lieutenants, mightnaturally go where he wished within or without the village, and so the sentryhad not questioned his right to enter the hut with the white, woman prisoner.</p>
			<p>Within, Werper called in French and in a low whisper: “Lady Greystoke! Itis I, M. Frecoult. Where are you?” But there was no response. Hastily theman felt around the interior, groping blindly through the darkness withoutstretched hands. There was no one within!</p>
			<p>Werper’s astonishment surpassed words. He was on the point of steppingwithout to question the sentry, when his eyes, becoming accustomed to the dark,discovered a blotch of lesser blackness near the base of the rear wall of thehut. Examination revealed the fact that the blotch was an opening cut in thewall. It was large enough to permit the passage of his body, and assured as hewas that Lady Greystoke had passed out through the aperture in an attempt toescape the village, he lost no time in availing himself of the same avenue; butneither did he lose time in a fruitless search for Jane Clayton.</p>
			<p>His own life depended upon the chance of his eluding, or outdistancing AchmetZek, when that worthy should have discovered that he had escaped. His originalplan had contemplated connivance in the escape of Lady Greystoke for two verygood and sufficient reasons. The first was that by saving her he would win thegratitude of the English, and thus lessen the chance of his extradition shouldhis identity and his crime against his superior officer be charged against him.</p>
			<p>The second reason was based upon the fact that only one direction of escape wassafely open to him. He could not travel to the west because of the Belgianpossessions which lay between him and the Atlantic. The south was closed to himby the feared presence of the savage ape-man he had robbed. To the north laythe friends and allies of Achmet Zek. Only toward the east, through BritishEast Africa, lay reasonable assurance of freedom.</p>
			<p>Accompanied by a titled Englishwoman whom he had rescued from a frightful fate,and his identity vouched for by her as that of a Frenchman by the name ofFrecoult, he had looked forward, and not without reason, to the activeassistance of the British from the moment that he came in contact with theirfirst outpost.</p>
			<p>But now that Lady Greystoke had disappeared, though he still looked toward theeast for hope, his chances were lessened, and another, subsidiary designcompletely dashed. From the moment that he had first laid eyes upon JaneClayton he had nursed within his breast a secret passion for the beautifulAmerican wife of the English lord, and when Achmet Zek’s discovery of thejewels had necessitated flight, the Belgian had dreamed, in his planning, of afuture in which he might convince Lady Greystoke that her husband was dead, andby playing upon her gratitude win her for himself.</p>
			<p>At that part of the village farthest from the gates, Werper discovered that twoor three long poles, taken from a nearby pile which had been collected for theconstruction of huts, had been leaned against the top of the palisade, forminga precarious, though not impossible avenue of escape.</p>
			<p>Rightly, he inferred that thus had Lady Greystoke found the means to scale thewall, nor did he lose even a moment in following her lead. Once in the junglehe struck out directly eastward.</p>
			<p>A few miles south of him, Jane Clayton lay panting among the branches of a treein which she had taken refuge from a prowling and hungry lioness.</p>
			<p>Her escape from the village had been much easier than she had anticipated. Theknife which she had used to cut her way through the brush wall of the hut tofreedom she had found sticking in the wall of her prison, doubtless left thereby accident when a former tenant had vacated the premises.</p>
			<p>To cross the rear of the village, keeping always in the densest shadows, hadrequired but a few moments, and the fortunate circumstance of the discovery ofthe hut poles lying so near the palisade had solved for her the problem of thepassage of the high wall.</p>
			<p>For an hour she had followed the old game trail toward the south, until therefell upon her trained hearing the stealthy padding of a stalking beast behindher. The nearest tree gave her instant sanctuary, for she was too wise in theways of the jungle to chance her safety for a moment after discovering that shewas being hunted.</p>
			<p>Werper, with better success, traveled slowly onward until dawn, when, to hischagrin, he discovered a mounted Arab upon his trail. It was one of AchmetZek’s minions, many of whom were scattered in all directions through theforest, searching for the fugitive Belgian.</p>
			<p>Jane Clayton’s escape had not yet been discovered when Achmet Zek and hissearchers set forth to overhaul Werper. The only man who had seen the Belgianafter his departure from his tent was the black sentry before the doorway ofLady Greystoke’s prison hut, and he had been silenced by the discovery ofthe dead body of the man who had relieved him, the sentry that Mugambi haddispatched.</p>
			<p>The bribe taker naturally inferred that Werper had slain his fellow and darednot admit that he had permitted him to enter the hut, fearing as he did, theanger of Achmet Zek. So, as chance directed that he should be the one todiscover the body of the sentry when the first alarm had been given followingAchmet Zek’s discovery that Werper had outwitted him, the crafty blackhad dragged the dead body to the interior of a nearby tent, and himself resumedhis station before the doorway of the hut in which he still believed the womanto be.</p>
			<p>With the discovery of the Arab close behind him, the Belgian hid in the foliageof a leafy bush. Here the trail ran straight for a considerable distance, anddown the shady forest aisle, beneath the overarching branches of the trees,rode the white-robed figure of the pursuer.</p>
			<p>Nearer and nearer he came. Werper crouched closer to the ground behind theleaves of his hiding place. Across the trail a vine moved. Werper’s eyesinstantly centered upon the spot. There was no wind to stir the foliage in thedepths of the jungle. Again the vine moved. In the mind of the Belgian only thepresence of a sinister and malevolent force could account for the phenomenon.</p>
			<p>The man’s eyes bored steadily into the screen of leaves upon the oppositeside of the trail. Gradually a form took shape beyond them⁠—a tawny form,grim and terrible, with yellow-green eyes glaring fearsomely across the narrowtrail straight into his.</p>
			<p>Werper could have screamed in fright, but up the trail was coming the messengerof another death, equally sure and no less terrible. He remained silent, almostparalyzed by fear. The Arab approached. Across the trail from Werper the lioncrouched for the spring, when suddenly his attention was attracted toward thehorseman.</p>
			<p>The Belgian saw the massive head turn in the direction of the raider and hisheart all but ceased its beating as he awaited the result of this interruption.At a walk the horseman approached. Would the nervous animal he rode take frightat the odor of the carnivore, and, bolting, leave Werper still to the merciesof the king of beasts?</p>
			<p>But he seemed unmindful of the near presence of the great cat. On he came, hisneck arched, champing at the bit between his teeth. The Belgian turned his eyesagain toward the lion. The beast’s whole attention now seemed rivetedupon the horseman. They were abreast the lion now, and still the brute did notspring. Could he be but waiting for them to pass before returning his attentionto the original prey? Werper shuddered and half rose. At the same instant thelion sprang from his place of concealment, full upon the mounted man. Thehorse, with a shrill neigh of terror, shrank sideways almost upon the Belgian,the lion dragged the helpless Arab from his saddle, and the horse leaped backinto the trail and fled away toward the west.</p>
			<p>But he did not flee alone. As the frightened beast had pressed in upon him,Werper had not been slow to note the quickly emptied saddle and the opportunityit presented. Scarcely had the lion dragged the Arab down from one side, thanthe Belgian, seizing the pommel of the saddle and the horse’s mane,leaped upon the horse’s back from the other.</p>
			<p>A half hour later a naked giant, swinging easily through the lower branches ofthe trees, paused, and with raised head, and dilating nostrils sniffed themorning air. The smell of blood fell strong upon his senses, and mingled withit was the scent of Numa, the lion. The giant cocked his head upon one side andlistened.</p>
			<p>From a short distance up the trail came the unmistakable noises of the greedyfeeding of a lion. The crunching of bones, the gulping of great pieces, thecontented growling, all attested the nearness of the king at table.</p>
			<p>Tarzan approached the spot, still keeping to the branches of the trees. He madeno effort to conceal his approach, and presently he had evidence that Numa hadheard him, from the ominous, rumbling warning that broke from a thicket besidethe trail.</p>
			<p>Halting upon a low branch just above the lion Tarzan looked down upon thegrisly scene. Could this unrecognizable thing be the man he had been trailing?The ape-man wondered. From time to time he had descended to the trail andverified his judgment by the evidence of his scent that the Belgian hadfollowed this game trail toward the east.</p>
			<p>Now he proceeded beyond the lion and his feast, again descended and examinedthe ground with his nose. There was no scent spoor here of the man he had beentrailing. Tarzan returned to the tree. With keen eyes he searched the groundabout the mutilated corpse for a sign of the missing pouch of pretty pebbles;but naught could he see of it.</p>
			<p>He scolded Numa and tried to drive the great beast away; but only angry growlsrewarded his efforts. He tore small branches from a nearby limb and hurled themat his ancient enemy. Numa looked up with bared fangs, grinning hideously, buthe did not rise from his kill.</p>
			<p>Then Tarzan fitted an arrow to his bow, and drawing the slim shaft far back letdrive with all the force of the tough wood that only he could bend. As thearrow sank deeply into his side, Numa leaped to his feet with a roar of mingledrage and pain. He leaped futilely at the grinning ape-man, tore at theprotruding end of the shaft, and then, springing into the trail, paced back andforth beneath his tormentor. Again Tarzan loosed a swift bolt. This time themissile, aimed with care, lodged in the lion’s spine. The great creaturehalted in its tracks, and lurched awkwardly forward upon its face, paralyzed.</p>
			<p>Tarzan dropped to the trail, ran quickly to the beast’s side, and drovehis spear deep into the fierce heart, then after recovering his arrows turnedhis attention to the mutilated remains of the animal’s prey in the nearbythicket.</p>
			<p>The face was gone. The Arab garments aroused no doubt as to the man’sidentity, since he had trailed him into the Arab camp and out again, where hemight easily have acquired the apparel. So sure was Tarzan that the body wasthat of he who had robbed him that he made no effort to verify his deductionsby scent among the conglomerate odors of the great carnivore and the freshblood of the victim.</p>
			<p>He confined his attentions to a careful search for the pouch, but nowhere uponor about the corpse was any sign of the missing article or its contents. Theape-man was disappointed⁠—possibly not so much because of the loss of thecolored pebbles as with Numa for robbing him of the pleasures of revenge.</p>
			<p>Wondering what could have become of his possessions, the ape-man turned slowlyback along the trail in the direction from which he had come. In his mind herevolved a plan to enter and search the Arab camp, after darkness had againfallen. Taking to the trees, he moved directly south in search of prey, that hemight satisfy his hunger before midday, and then lie up for the afternoon insome spot far from the camp, where he might sleep without fear of discoveryuntil it came time to prosecute his design.</p>
			<p>Scarcely had he quitted the trail when a tall, black warrior, moving at adogged trot, passed toward the east. It was Mugambi, searching for hismistress. He continued along the trail, halting to examine the body of the deadlion. An expression of puzzlement crossed his features as he bent to search forthe wounds which had caused the death of the jungle lord. Tarzan had removedhis arrows, but to Mugambi the proof of death was as strong as though both thelighter missiles and the spear still protruded from the carcass.</p>
			<p>The black looked furtively about him. The body was still warm, and from thisfact he reasoned that the killer was close at hand, yet no sign of living manappeared. Mugambi shook his head, and continued along the trail, but withredoubled caution.</p>
			<p>All day he traveled, stopping occasionally to call aloud the single word,“Lady,” in the hope that at last she might hear and respond; but inthe end his loyal devotion brought him to disaster.</p>
			<p>From the northeast, for several months, Abdul Mourak, in command of adetachment of Abyssinian soldiers, had been assiduously searching for the Arabraider, Achmet Zek, who, six months previously, had affronted the majesty ofAbdul Mourak’s emperor by conducting a slave raid within the boundariesof Menelek’s domain.</p>
			<p>And now it happened that Abdul Mourak had halted for a short rest at noon uponthis very day and along the same trail that Werper and Mugambi were followingtoward the east.</p>
			<p>It was shortly after the soldiers had dismounted that the Belgian, unaware oftheir presence, rode his tired mount almost into their midst, before he haddiscovered them. Instantly he was surrounded, and a volley of questions hurledat him, as he was pulled from his horse and led toward the presence of thecommander.</p>
			<p>Falling back upon his European nationality, Werper assured Abdul Mourak that hewas a Frenchman, hunting in Africa, and that he had been attacked by strangers,his safari killed or scattered, and himself escaping only by a miracle.</p>
			<p>From a chance remark of the Abyssinian, Werper discovered the purpose of theexpedition, and when he realized that these men were the enemies of Achmet Zek,he took heart, and immediately blamed his predicament upon the Arab.</p>
			<p>Lest, however, he might again fall into the hands of the raider, he discouragedAbdul Mourak in the further prosecution of his pursuit, assuring the Abyssinianthat Achmet Zek commanded a large and dangerous force, and also that he wasmarching rapidly toward the south.</p>
			<p>Convinced that it would take a long time to overhaul the raider, and that thechances of engagement made the outcome extremely questionable, Mourak, none toounwillingly, abandoned his plan and gave the necessary orders for his commandto pitch camp where they were, preparatory to taking up the return march towardAbyssinia the following morning.</p>
			<p>It was late in the afternoon that the attention of the camp was attractedtoward the west by the sound of a powerful voice calling a single word,repeated several times: “Lady! Lady! Lady!”</p>
			<p>True to their instincts of precaution, a number of Abyssinians, acting underorders from Abdul Mourak, advanced stealthily through the jungle toward theauthor of the call.</p>
			<p>A half hour later they returned, dragging Mugambi among them. The first personthe big black’s eyes fell upon as he was hustled into the presence of theAbyssinian officer, was M. Jules Frecoult, the Frenchman who had been the guestof his master and whom he last had seen entering the village of Achmet Zekunder circumstances which pointed to his familiarity and friendship for theraiders.</p>
			<p>Between the disasters that had befallen his master and his master’shouse, and the Frenchman, Mugambi saw a sinister relationship, which kept himfrom recalling to Werper’s attention the identity which the latterevidently failed to recognize.</p>
			<p>Pleading that he was but a harmless hunter from a tribe farther south, Mugambibegged to be allowed to go upon his way; but Abdul Mourak, admiring thewarrior’s splendid physique, decided to take him back to Adis Abeba andpresent him to Menelek. A few moments later Mugambi and Werper were marchedaway under guard, and the Belgian learned for the first time, that he too was aprisoner rather than a guest. In vain he protested against such treatment,until a strapping soldier struck him across the mouth and threatened to shoothim if he did not desist.</p>
			<p>Mugambi took the matter less to heart, for he had not the slightest doubt butthat during the course of the journey he would find ample opportunity to eludethe vigilance of his guards and make good his escape. With this idea alwaysuppermost in his mind, he courted the good opinion of the Abyssinians, askedthem many questions about their emperor and their country, and evinced agrowing desire to reach their destination, that he might enjoy all the goodthings which they assured him the city of Adis Abeba contained. Thus hedisarmed their suspicions, and each day found a slight relaxation of theirwatchfulness over him.</p>
			<p>By taking advantage of the fact that he and Werper always were kept together,Mugambi sought to learn what the other knew of the whereabouts of Tarzan, orthe authorship of the raid upon the bungalow, as well as the fate of LadyGreystoke; but as he was confined to the accidents of conversation for thisinformation, not daring to acquaint Werper with his true identity, and asWerper was equally anxious to conceal from the world his part in thedestruction of his host’s home and happiness, Mugambi learnednothing⁠—at least in this way.</p>
			<p>But there came a time when he learned a very surprising thing, by accident.</p>
			<p>The party had camped early in the afternoon of a sultry day, upon the banks ofa clear and beautiful stream. The bottom of the river was gravelly, there wasno indication of crocodiles, those menaces to promiscuous bathing in the riversof certain portions of the dark continent, and so the Abyssinians tookadvantage of the opportunity to perform long-deferred, and much needed,ablutions.</p>
			<p>As Werper, who, with Mugambi, had been given permission to enter the water,removed his clothing, the black noted the care with which he unfastenedsomething which circled his waist, and which he took off with his shirt,keeping the latter always around and concealing the object of his suspicioussolicitude.</p>
			<p>It was this very carefulness which attracted the black’s attention to thething, arousing a natural curiosity in the warrior’s mind, and so itchanced that when the Belgian, in the nervousness of overcaution, fumbled thehidden article and dropped it, Mugambi saw it as it fell upon the ground,spilling a portion of its contents on the sward.</p>
			<p>Now Mugambi had been to London with his master. He was not the unsophisticatedsavage that his apparel proclaimed him. He had mingled with the cosmopolitanhordes of the greatest city in the world; he had visited museums and inspectedshop windows; and, besides, he was a shrewd and intelligent man.</p>
			<p>The instant that the jewels of Opar rolled, scintillating, before hisastonished eyes, he recognized them for what they were; but he recognizedsomething else, too, that interested him far more deeply than the value of thestones. A thousand times he had seen the leathern pouch which dangled at hismaster’s side, when Tarzan of the Apes had, in a spirit of play andadventure, elected to return for a few hours to the primitive manners andcustoms of his boyhood, and surrounded by his naked warriors hunt the lion andthe leopard, the buffalo and the elephant after the manner he loved best.</p>
			<p>Werper saw that Mugambi had seen the pouch and the stones. Hastily he gatheredup the precious gems and returned them to their container, while Mugambi,assuming an air of indifference, strolled down to the river for his bath.</p>
			<p>The following morning Abdul Mourak was enraged and chagrined to discover thathis huge, black prisoner had escaped during the night, while Werper wasterrified for the same reason, until his trembling fingers discovered the pouchstill in its place beneath his shirt, and within it the hard outlines of itscontents.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
