<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title><em>vii</em></title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2><span epub:type="label">Chapter</span> <span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman"><em>vii</em></span></h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Jewel-Room of Opar</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>For some time Tarzan lay where he had fallen upon the floor of the treasurechamber beneath the ruined walls of Opar. He lay as one dead; but he was notdead. At length he stirred. His eyes opened upon the utter darkness of theroom. He raised his hand to his head and brought it away sticky with clottedblood. He sniffed at his fingers, as a wild beast might sniff at the life-bloodupon a wounded paw.</p>
			<p>Slowly he rose to a sitting posture⁠—listening. No sound reached to theburied depths of his sepulcher. He staggered to his feet, and groped his wayabout among the tiers of ingots. What was he? Where was he? His head ached; butotherwise he felt no ill effects from the blow that had felled him. Theaccident he did not recall, nor did he recall aught of what had led up to it.</p>
			<p>He let his hands grope unfamiliarly over his limbs, his torso, and his head. Hefelt of the quiver at his back, the knife in his loin cloth. Somethingstruggled for recognition within his brain. Ah! he had it. There was somethingmissing. He crawled about upon the floor, feeling with his hands for the thingthat instinct warned him was gone. At last he found it⁠—the heavy warspear that in past years had formed so important a feature of his daily life,almost of his very existence, so inseparably had it been connected with hisevery action since the long-gone day that he had wrested his first spear fromthe body of a black victim of his savage training.</p>
			<p>Tarzan was sure that there was another and more lovely world than that whichwas confined to the darkness of the four stone walls surrounding him. Hecontinued his search and at last found the doorway leading inward beneath thecity and the temple. This he followed, most incautiously. He came to the stonesteps leading upward to the higher level. He ascended them and continued onwardtoward the well.</p>
			<p>Nothing spurred his hurt memory to a recollection of past familiarity with hissurroundings. He blundered on through the darkness as though he were traversingan open plain under the brilliance of a noonday sun, and suddenly therehappened that which had to happen under the circumstances of his rash advance.</p>
			<p>He reached the brink of the well, stepped outward into space, lunged forward,and shot downward into the inky depths below. Still clutching his spear, hestruck the water, and sank beneath its surface, plumbing the depths.</p>
			<p>The fall had not injured him, and when he rose to the surface, he shook thewater from his eyes, and found that he could see. Daylight was filtering intothe well from the orifice far above his head. It illumined the inner wallsfaintly. Tarzan gazed about him. On the level with the surface of the water hesaw a large opening in the dark and slimy wall. He swam to it, and drew himselfout upon the wet floor of a tunnel.</p>
			<p>Along this he passed; but now he went warily, for Tarzan of the Apes waslearning. The unexpected pit had taught him care in the traversing of darkpassageways⁠—he needed no second lesson.</p>
			<p>For a long distance the passage went straight as an arrow. The floor wasslippery, as though at times the rising waters of the well overflowed andflooded it. This, in itself, retarded Tarzan’s pace, for it was withdifficulty that he kept his footing.</p>
			<p>The foot of a stairway ended the passage. Up this he made his way. It turnedback and forth many times, leading, at last, into a small, circular chamber,the gloom of which was relieved by a faint light which found ingress through atubular shaft several feet in diameter which rose from the center of theroom’s ceiling, upward to a distance of a hundred feet or more, where itterminated in a stone grating through which Tarzan could see a blue and sun-litsky.</p>
			<p>Curiosity prompted the ape-man to investigate his surroundings. Severalmetal-bound, copper-studded chests constituted the sole furniture of the roundroom. Tarzan let his hands run over these. He felt of the copper studs, hepulled upon the hinges, and at last, by chance, he raised the cover of one.</p>
			<p>An exclamation of delight broke from his lips at sight of the pretty contents.Gleaming and glistening in the subdued light of the chamber, lay a great trayfull of brilliant stones. Tarzan, reverted to the primitive by his accident,had no conception of the fabulous value of his find. To him they were butpretty pebbles. He plunged his hands into them and let the priceless gemsfilter through his fingers. He went to others of the chests, only to find stillfurther stores of precious stones. Nearly all were cut, and from these hegathered a handful and filled the pouch which dangled at his side⁠—theuncut stones he tossed back into the chests.</p>
			<p>Unwittingly, the ape-man had stumbled upon the forgotten jewel-room of Opar.For ages it had lain buried beneath the temple of the Flaming God, midway ofone of the many inky passages which the superstitious descendants of theancient Sun Worshipers had either dared not or cared not to explore.</p>
			<p>Tiring at last of this diversion, Tarzan took up his way along the corridorwhich led upward from the jewel-room by a steep incline. Winding and twisting,but always tending upward, the tunnel led him nearer and nearer to the surface,ending finally in a low-ceiled room, lighter than any that he had as yetdiscovered.</p>
			<p>Above him an opening in the ceiling at the upper end of a flight of concretesteps revealed a brilliant sunlit scene. Tarzan viewed the vine-covered columnsin mild wonderment. He puckered his brows in an attempt to recall somerecollection of similar things. He was not sure of himself. There was atantalizing suggestion always present in his mind that something was eludinghim⁠—that he should know many things which he did not know.</p>
			<p>His earnest cogitation was rudely interrupted by a thunderous roar from theopening above him. Following the roar came the cries and screams of men andwomen. Tarzan grasped his spear more firmly and ascended the steps. A strangesight met his eyes as he emerged from the semidarkness of the cellar to thebrilliant light of the temple.</p>
			<p>The creatures he saw before him he recognized for what they were⁠—men andwomen, and a huge lion. The men and women were scuttling for the safety of theexits. The lion stood upon the body of one who had been less fortunate than theothers. He was in the center of the temple. Directly before Tarzan, a womanstood beside a block of stone. Upon the top of the stone lay stretched a man,and as the ape-man watched the scene, he saw the lion glare terribly at the twowho remained within the temple. Another thunderous roar broke from the savagethroat, the woman screamed and swooned across the body of the man stretchedprostrate upon the stone altar before her.</p>
			<p>The lion advanced a few steps and crouched. The tip of his sinuous tailtwitched nervously. He was upon the point of charging when his eyes wereattracted toward the ape-man.</p>
			<p>Werper, helpless upon the altar, saw the great carnivore preparing to leap uponhim. He saw the sudden change in the beast’s expression as his eyeswandered to something beyond the altar and out of the Belgian’s view. Hesaw the formidable creature rise to a standing position. A figure darted pastWerper. He saw a mighty arm upraised, and a stout spear shoot forward towardthe lion, to bury itself in the broad chest.</p>
			<p>He saw the lion snapping and tearing at the weapon’s shaft, and he saw,wonder of wonders, the naked giant who had hurled the missile charging upon thegreat beast, only a long knife ready to meet those ferocious fangs and talons.</p>
			<p>The lion reared up to meet this new enemy. The beast was growling frightfully,and then upon the startled ears of the Belgian, broke a similar savage growlfrom the lips of the man rushing upon the beast.</p>
			<p>By a quick side step, Tarzan eluded the first swinging clutch of thelion’s paws. Darting to the beast’s side, he leaped upon the tawnyback. His arms encircled the maned neck, his teeth sank deep into thebrute’s flesh. Roaring, leaping, rolling and struggling, the giant catattempted to dislodge this savage enemy, and all the while one great, brownfist was driving a long keen blade repeatedly into the beast’s side.</p>
			<p>During the battle, La regained consciousness. Spellbound, she stood above hervictim watching the spectacle. It seemed incredible that a human being couldbest the king of beasts in personal encounter and yet before her very eyesthere was taking place just such an improbability.</p>
			<p>At last Tarzan’s knife found the great heart, and with a final, spasmodicstruggle the lion rolled over upon the marble floor, dead. Leaping to his feetthe conqueror placed a foot upon the carcass of his kill, raised his facetoward the heavens, and gave voice to so hideous a cry that both La and Werpertrembled as it reverberated through the temple.</p>
			<p>Then the ape-man turned, and Werper recognized him as the man he had left fordead in the treasure room.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
