<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter V: The Altar of the Flaming God</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Chapter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Altar of the Flaming God</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>It was at the moment that Tarzan turned from the closed door to pursue his wayto the outer world. The thing came without warning. One instant all was quietand stability⁠—the next, and the world rocked, the tortured sides of thenarrow passageway split and crumbled, great blocks of granite, dislodged fromthe ceiling, tumbled into the narrow way, choking it, and the walls bent inwardupon the wreckage. Beneath the blow of a fragment of the roof, Tarzan staggeredback against the door to the treasure room, his weight pushed it open and hisbody rolled inward upon the floor.</p>
			<p>In the great apartment where the treasure lay less damage was wrought by theearthquake. A few ingots toppled from the higher tiers, a single piece of therocky ceiling splintered off and crashed downward to the floor, and the wallscracked, though they did not collapse.</p>
			<p>There was but the single shock, no other followed to complete the damageundertaken by the first. Werper, thrown to his length by the suddenness andviolence of the disturbance, staggered to his feet when he found himselfunhurt. Groping his way toward the far end of the chamber, he sought the candlewhich Tarzan had left stuck in its own wax upon the protruding end of an ingot.</p>
			<p>By striking numerous matches the Belgian at last found what he sought, andwhen, a moment later, the sickly rays relieved the Stygian darkness about him, he breathed a nervous sigh of relief, for the impenetrable gloom hadaccentuated the terrors of his situation.</p>
			<p>As they became accustomed to the light the man turned his eyes toward thedoor⁠—his one thought now was of escape from this frightful tomb⁠—andas he did so he saw the body of the naked giant lying stretched upon the floorjust within the doorway. Werper drew back in sudden fear of detection; but asecond glance convinced him that the Englishman was dead. From a great gash inthe man’s head a pool of blood had collected upon the concrete floor.</p>
			<p>Quickly, the Belgian leaped over the prostrate form of his erstwhile host, andwithout a thought of succor for the man in whom, for aught he knew, life stillremained, he bolted for the passageway and safety.</p>
			<p>But his renewed hopes were soon dashed. Just beyond the doorway he found thepassage completely clogged and choked by impenetrable masses of shattered rock.Once more he turned and re-entered the treasure vault. Taking the candle fromits place he commenced a systematic search of the apartment, nor had he gonefar before he discovered another door in the opposite end of the room, a doorwhich gave upon creaking hinges to the weight of his body. Beyond the door layanother narrow passageway. Along this Werper made his way, ascending a flightof stone steps to another corridor twenty feet above the level of the first.The flickering candle lighted the way before him, and a moment later he wasthankful for the possession of this crude and antiquated luminant, which, a fewhours before he might have looked upon with contempt, for it showed him, justin time, a yawning pit, apparently terminating the tunnel he was traversing.</p>
			<p>Before him was a circular shaft. He held the candle above it and peereddownward. Below him, at a great distance, he saw the light reflected back fromthe surface of a pool of water. He had come upon a well. He raised the candleabove his head and peered across the black void, and there upon the oppositeside he saw the continuation of the tunnel; but how was he to span the gulf?</p>
			<p>As he stood there measuring the distance to the opposite side and wondering ifhe dared venture so great a leap, there broke suddenly upon his startled ears apiercing scream which diminished gradually until it ended in a series of dismalmoans. The voice seemed partly human, yet so hideous that it might well haveemanated from the tortured throat of a lost soul, writhing in the fires ofhell.</p>
			<p>The Belgian shuddered and looked fearfully upward, for the scream had seemed tocome from above him. As he looked he saw an opening far overhead, and a patchof sky pinked with brilliant stars.</p>
			<p>His half-formed intention to call for help was expunged by the terrifyingcry⁠—where such a voice lived, no human creatures could dwell. He darednot reveal himself to whatever inhabitants dwelt in the place above him. Hecursed himself for a fool that he had ever embarked upon such a mission. Hewished himself safely back in the camp of Achmet Zek, and would almost haveembraced an opportunity to give himself up to the military authorities of theCongo if by so doing he might be rescued from the frightful predicament inwhich he now was.</p>
			<p>He listened fearfully, but the cry was not repeated, and at last spurred todesperate means, he gathered himself for the leap across the chasm. Going backtwenty paces, he took a running start, and at the edge of the well, leapedupward and outward in an attempt to gain the opposite side.</p>
			<p>In his hand he clutched the sputtering candle, and as he took the leap the rushof air extinguished it. In utter darkness he flew through space, clutchingoutward for a hold should his feet miss the invisible ledge.</p>
			<p>He struck the edge of the door of the opposite terminus of the rocky tunnelwith his knees, slipped backward, clutched desperately for a moment, and atlast hung half within and half without the opening; but he was safe. Forseveral minutes he dared not move; but clung, weak and sweating, where he lay.At last, cautiously, he drew himself well within the tunnel, and again he layat full length upon the floor, fighting to regain control of his shatterednerves.</p>
			<p>When his knees struck the edge of the tunnel he had dropped the candle.Presently, hoping against hope that it had fallen upon the floor of passage-way, rather than back into the depths of the well, he rose upon allfours and commenced a diligent search for the little tallow cylinder, which nowseemed infinitely more precious to him than all the fabulous wealth of thehoarded ingots of Opar.</p>
			<p>And when, at last, he found it, he clasped it to him and sank back sobbing andexhausted. For many minutes he lay trembling and broken; but finally he drewhimself to a sitting posture, and taking a match from his pocket, lighted thestump of the candle which remained to him. With the light he found it easier toregain control of his nerves, and presently he was again making his way alongthe tunnel in search of an avenue of escape. The horrid cry that had come downto him from above through the ancient well-shaft still haunted him, so that hetrembled in terror at even the sounds of his own cautious advance.</p>
			<p>He had gone forward but a short distance, when, to his chagrin, a wall ofmasonry barred his farther progress, closing the tunnel completely from top tobottom and from side to side. What could it mean? Werper was an educated andintelligent man. His military training had taught him to use his mind for thepurpose for which it was intended. A blind tunnel such as this was senseless.It must continue beyond the wall. Someone, at some time in the past, had had itblocked for an unknown purpose of his own. The man fell to examining themasonry by the light of his candle. To his delight he discovered that the thinblocks of hewn stone of which it was constructed were fitted in loosely withoutmortar or cement. He tugged upon one of them, and to his joy found that it waseasily removable. One after another he pulled out the blocks until he hadopened an aperture large enough to admit his body, then he crawled through intoa large, low chamber. Across this another door barred his way; but this, too, gave before his efforts, for it was not barred. A long, dark corridor showedbefore him, but before he had followed it far, his candle burned down until itscorched his fingers. With an oath he dropped it to the floor, where itsputtered for a moment and went out.</p>
			<p>Now he was in total darkness, and again terror rode heavily astride his neck.What further pitfalls and dangers lay ahead he could not guess; but that he wasas far as ever from liberty he was quite willing to believe, so depressing isutter absence of light to one in unfamiliar surroundings.</p>
			<p>Slowly he groped his way along, feeling with his hands upon the tunnel’swalls, and cautiously with his feet ahead of him upon the floor before he couldtake a single forward step. How long he crept on thus he could not guess; butat last, feeling that the tunnel’s length was interminable, and exhaustedby his efforts, by terror, and loss of sleep, he determined to lie down andrest before proceeding farther.</p>
			<p>When he awoke there was no change in the surrounding blackness. He might haveslept a second or a day⁠—he could not know; but that he had slept for sometime was attested by the fact that he felt refreshed and hungry.</p>
			<p>Again he commenced his groping advance; but this time he had gone but a shortdistance when he emerged into a room, which was lighted through an opening inthe ceiling, from which a flight of concrete steps led downward to the floor ofthe chamber.</p>
			<p>Above him, through the aperture, Werper could see sunlight glancing frommassive columns, which were twined about by clinging vines. He listened; but heheard no sound other than the soughing of the wind through leafy branches, thehoarse cries of birds, and the chattering of monkeys.</p>
			<p>Boldly he ascended the stairway, to find himself in a circular court. Justbefore him stood a stone altar, stained with rusty-brown discolorations. At thetime Werper gave no thought to an explanation of these stains⁠—later theirorigin became all too hideously apparent to him.</p>
			<p>Beside the opening in the floor, just behind the altar, through which he hadentered the court from the subterranean chamber below, the Belgian discoveredseveral doors leading from the enclosure upon the level of the floor. Above, and circling the courtyard, was a series of open balconies. Monkeys scamperedabout the deserted ruins, and gaily plumaged birds flitted in and out among thecolumns and the galleries far above; but no sign of human presence wasdiscernible. Werper felt relieved. He sighed, as though a great weight had beenlifted from his shoulders. He took a step toward one of the exits, and then hehalted, wide-eyed in astonishment and terror, for almost at the same instant adozen doors opened in the courtyard wall and a horde of frightful men rushed inupon him.</p>
			<p>They were the priests of the Flaming God of Opar⁠—the same, shaggy, knotted, hideous little men who had dragged Jane Clayton to the sacrificialaltar at this very spot years before. Their long arms, their short and crookedlegs, their close-set, evil eyes, and their low, receding foreheads gave them abestial appearance that sent a qualm of paralyzing fright through the shakennerves of the Belgian.</p>
			<p>With a scream he turned to flee back into the lesser terrors of the gloomycorridors and apartments from which he had just emerged, but the frightful menanticipated his intentions. They blocked the way; they seized him, and thoughhe fell, groveling upon his knees before them, begging for his life, they boundhim and hurled him to the floor of the inner temple.</p>
			<p>The rest was but a repetition of what Tarzan and Jane Clayton had passedthrough. The priestesses came, and with them La, the High Priestess. Werper wasraised and laid across the altar. Cold sweat exuded from his every pore as Laraised the cruel, sacrificial knife above him. The death chant fell upon histortured ears. His staring eyes wandered to the golden goblets from which thehideous votaries would soon quench their inhuman thirst in his own, warmlife-blood.</p>
			<p>He wished that he might be granted the brief respite of unconsciousness beforethe final plunge of the keen blade⁠—and then there was a frightful roarthat sounded almost in his ears. The High Priestess lowered her dagger. Hereyes went wide in horror. The priestesses, her votaresses, screamed and fledmadly toward the exits. The priests roared out their rage and terror accordingto the temper of their courage. Werper strained his neck about to catch a sightof the cause of their panic, and when, at last he saw it, he too went cold indread, for what his eyes beheld was the figure of a huge lion standing in thecenter of the temple, and already a single victim lay mangled beneath his cruelpaws.</p>
			<p>Again the lord of the wilderness roared, turning his baleful gaze upon thealtar. La staggered forward, reeled, and fell across Werper in a swoon.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
