<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>CHAPTER III.The Call of the Jungle</h2>
			<p>Moved by these vague yet all-powerful urgings the ape-man lay awake one nightin the little thorn boma that protected, in a way, his party from thedepredations of the great carnivora of the jungle. A single warrior stoodsleepy guard beside the fire that yellow eyes out of the darkness beyond thecamp made imperative. The moans and the coughing of the big cats mingled withthe myriad noises of the lesser denizens of the jungle to fan the savage flamein the breast of this savage English lord. He tossed upon his bed of grasses,sleepless, for an hour and then he rose, noiseless as a wraith, and while theWaziri’s back was turned, vaulted the boma wall in the face of theflaming eyes, swung silently into a great tree and was gone.</p>
			<p>For a time in sheer exuberance of animal spirit he raced swiftly through themiddle terrace, swinging perilously across wide spans from one jungle giant tothe next, and then he clambered upward to the swaying, lesser boughs of theupper terrace where the moon shone full upon him and the air was stirred bylittle breezes and death lurked ready in each frail branch. Here he paused andraised his face to Goro, the moon. With uplifted arm he stood, the cry of thebull ape quivering upon his lips, yet he remained silent lest he arouse hisfaithful Waziri who were all too familiar with the hideous challenge of theirmaster.</p>
			<p>And then he went on more slowly and with greater stealth and caution, for nowTarzan of the Apes was seeking a kill. Down to the ground he came in the utterblackness of the close-set boles and the overhanging verdure of the jungle. Hestooped from time to time and put his nose close to earth. He sought and founda wide game trail and at last his nostrils were rewarded with the scent of thefresh spoor of Bara, the deer. Tarzan’s mouth watered and a low growlescaped his patrician lips. Sloughed from him was the last vestige ofartificial caste⁠—once again he was the primeval hunter⁠—the firstman⁠—the highest caste type of the human race. Up wind he followed theelusive spoor with a sense of perception so transcending that of ordinary manas to be inconceivable to us. Through counter currents of the heavy stench ofmeat eaters he traced the trail of Bara; the sweet and cloying stink of Horta,the boar, could not drown his quarry’s scent⁠—the permeating, mellowmusk of the deer’s foot.</p>
			<p>Presently the body scent of the deer told Tarzan that his prey was close athand. It sent him into the trees again⁠—into the lower terrace where hecould watch the ground below and catch with ears and nose the first intimationof actual contact with his quarry. Nor was it long before the ape-man came uponBara standing alert at the edge of a moon-bathed clearing. Noiselessly Tarzancrept through the trees until he was directly over the deer. In theape-man’s right hand was the long hunting knife of his father and in hisheart the blood lust of the carnivore. Just for an instant he poised above theunsuspecting Bara and then he launched himself downward upon the sleek back.The impact of his weight carried the deer to its knees and before the animalcould regain its feet the knife had found its heart. As Tarzan rose upon thebody of his kill to scream forth his hideous victory cry into the face of themoon the wind carried to his nostrils something which froze him to statuesqueimmobility and silence. His savage eyes blazed into the direction from whichthe wind had borne down the warning to him and a moment later the grasses atone side of the clearing parted and Numa, the lion, strode majestically intoview. His yellow-green eyes were fastened upon Tarzan as he halted just withinthe clearing and glared enviously at the successful hunter, for Numa had had noluck this night.</p>
			<p>From the lips of the ape-man broke a rumbling growl of warning. Numa answeredbut he did not advance. Instead he stood waving his tail gently to and fro, andpresently Tarzan squatted upon his kill and cut a generous portion from a hindquarter. Numa eyed him with growing resentment and rage as, between mouthfuls,the ape-man growled out his savage warnings. Now this particular lion had neverbefore come in contact with Tarzan of the Apes and he was much mystified. Herewas the appearance and the scent of a man-thing and Numa had tasted of humanflesh and learned that though not the most palatable it was certainly by farthe easiest to secure, yet there was that in the bestial growls of the strangecreature which reminded him of formidable antagonists and gave him pause, whilehis hunger and the odor of the hot flesh of Bara goaded him almost to madness.Always Tarzan watched him, guessing what was passing in the little brain of thecarnivore and well it was that he did watch him, for at last Numa could standit no longer. His tail shot suddenly erect and at the same instant the waryape-man, knowing all too well what the signal portended, grasped the remainderof the deer’s hind quarter between his teeth and leaped into a nearbytree as Numa charged him with all the speed and a sufficient semblance of theweight of an express train.</p>
			<p>Tarzan’s retreat was no indication that he felt fear. Jungle life isordered along different lines than ours and different standards prevail. HadTarzan been famished he would, doubtless, have stood his ground and met thelion’s charge. He had done the thing before upon more than one occasion,just as in the past he had charged lions himself; but tonight he was far fromfamished and in the hind quarter he had carried off with him was more raw fleshthan he could eat; yet it was with no equanimity that he looked down upon Numarending the flesh of Tarzan’s kill. The presumption of this strange Numamust be punished! And forthwith Tarzan set out to make life miserable for thebig cat. Close by were many trees bearing large, hard fruits and to one ofthese the ape-man swung with the agility of a squirrel. Then commenced abombardment which brought forth earthshaking roars from Numa. One after anotheras rapidly as he could gather and hurl them, Tarzan pelted the hard fruit downupon the lion. It was impossible for the tawny cat to eat under that hail ofmissiles⁠—he could but roar and growl and dodge and eventually he wasdriven away entirely from the carcass of Bara, the deer. He went roaring andresentful; but in the very center of the clearing his voice was suddenly hushedand Tarzan saw the great head lower and flatten out, the body crouch and thelong tail quiver, as the beast slunk cautiously toward the trees upon theopposite side.</p>
			<p>Immediately Tarzan was alert. He lifted his head and sniffed the slow, junglebreeze. What was it that had attracted Numa’s attention and taken himsoft-footed and silent away from the scene of his discomfiture? Just as thelion disappeared among the trees beyond the clearing Tarzan caught upon thedown-coming wind the explanation of his new interest⁠—the scent spoor ofman was wafted strongly to the sensitive nostrils. Caching the remainder of thedeer’s hind quarter in the crotch of a tree the ape-man wiped his greasypalms upon his naked thighs and swung off in pursuit of Numa. A broad,well-beaten elephant path led into the forest from the clearing. Parallel tothis slunk Numa, while above him Tarzan moved through the trees, the shadow ofa wraith. The savage cat and the savage man saw Numa’s quarry almostsimultaneously, though both had known before it came within the vision of theireyes that it was a black man. Their sensitive nostrils had told them this muchand Tarzan’s had told him that the scent spoor was that of astranger⁠—old and a male, for race and sex and age each has its owndistinctive scent. It was an old man that made his way alone through the gloomyjungle, a wrinkled, dried up, little old man hideously scarred and tattooed andstrangely garbed, with the skin of a hyena about his shoulders and the driedhead mounted upon his grey pate. Tarzan recognized the ear-marks of thewitch-doctor and awaited Numa’s charge with a feeling of pleasurableanticipation, for the ape-man had no love for witch-doctors; but in the instantthat Numa did charge, the white man suddenly recalled that the lion had stolenhis kill a few minutes before and that revenge is sweet.</p>
			<p>The first intimation the black man had that he was in danger was the crash oftwigs as Numa charged through the bushes into the game trail not twenty yardsbehind him. Then he turned to see a huge, black-maned lion racing toward himand even as he turned, Numa seized him. At the same instant the ape-man droppedfrom an overhanging limb full upon the lion’s back and as he alighted heplunged his knife into the tawny side behind the left shoulder, tangled thefingers of his right hand in the long mane, buried his teeth in Numa’sneck and wound his powerful legs about the beast’s torso. With a roar ofpain and rage, Numa reared up and fell backward upon the ape-man; but still themighty man-thing clung to his hold and repeatedly the long knife plungedrapidly into his side. Over and over rolled Numa, the lion, clawing and bitingat the air, roaring and growling horribly in savage attempt to reach the thingupon its back. More than once was Tarzan almost brushed from his hold. He wasbattered and bruised and covered with blood from Numa and dirt from the trail,yet not for an instant did he lessen the ferocity of his mad attack nor hisgrim hold upon the back of his antagonist. To have loosened for an instant hisgrip there, would have been to bring him within reach of those tearing talonsor rending fangs, and have ended forever the grim career of this jungle-bredEnglish lord. Where he had fallen beneath the spring of the lion thewitch-doctor lay, torn and bleeding, unable to drag himself away and watchedthe terrific battle between these two lords of the jungle. His sunken eyesglittered and his wrinkled lips moved over toothless gums as he mumbled weirdincantations to the demons of his cult.</p>
			<p>For a time he felt no doubt as to the outcome⁠—the strange white man mustcertainly succumb to terrible Simba⁠—whoever heard of a lone man armedonly with a knife slaying so mighty a beast! Yet presently the old blackman’s eyes went wider and he commenced to have his doubts and misgivings.What wonderful sort of creature was this that battled with Simba and held hisown despite the mighty muscles of the king of beasts and slowly there dawned inthose sunken eyes, gleaming so brightly from the scarred and wrinkled face, thelight of a dawning recollection. Gropingly backward into the past reached thefingers of memory, until at last they seized upon a faint picture, faded andyellow with the passing years. It was the picture of a lithe, white-skinnedyouth swinging through the trees in company with a band of huge apes, and theold eyes blinked and a great fear came into them⁠—the superstitious fearof one who believes in ghosts and spirits and demons.</p>
			<p>And came the time once more when the witch-doctor no longer doubted the outcomeof the duel, yet his first judgment was reversed, for now he knew that thejungle god would slay Simba and the old black was even more terrified of hisown impending fate at the hands of the victor than he had been by the sure andsudden death which the triumphant lion would have meted out to him. He saw thelion weaken from loss of blood. He saw the mighty limbs tremble and stagger andat last he saw the beast sink down to rise no more. He saw the forest god ordemon rise from the vanquished foe, and placing a foot upon the still quiveringcarcass, raise his face to the moon and bay out a hideous cry that froze theebbing blood in the veins of the witch-doctor.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
