<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title><em>ii</em></title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2><span epub:type="label">Chapter</span> <span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman"><em>ii</em></span></h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">On the Road To Opar</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>It was two weeks later that John Clayton, Lord Greystoke, riding in from a tourof inspection of his vast African estate, glimpsed the head of a column of mencrossing the plain that lay between his bungalow and the forest to the northand west.</p>
			<p>He reined in his horse and watched the little party as it emerged from aconcealing swale. His keen eyes caught the reflection of the sun upon the whitehelmet of a mounted man, and with the conviction that a wandering Europeanhunter was seeking his hospitality, he wheeled his mount and rode slowlyforward to meet the newcomer.</p>
			<p>A half hour later he was mounting the steps leading to the veranda of hisbungalow, and introducing <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Jules Frecoult to Lady Greystoke.</p>
			<p>“I was completely lost,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Frecoult was explaining. “My headman had never before been in this part of the country and the guides who wereto have accompanied me from the last village we passed knew even less of thecountry than we. They finally deserted us two days since. I am very fortunateindeed to have stumbled so providentially upon succor. I do not know what Ishould have done, had I not found you.”</p>
			<p>It was decided that Frecoult and his party should remain several days, or untilthey were thoroughly rested, when Lord Greystoke would furnish guides to leadthem safely back into country with which Frecoult’s head man wassupposedly familiar.</p>
			<p>In his guise of a French gentleman of leisure, Werper found little difficultyin deceiving his host and in ingratiating himself with both Tarzan and JaneClayton; but the longer he remained the less hopeful he became of an easyaccomplishment of his designs.</p>
			<p>Lady Greystoke never rode alone at any great distance from the bungalow, andthe savage loyalty of the ferocious Waziri warriors who formed a great part ofTarzan’s followers seemed to preclude the possibility of a successfulattempt at forcible abduction, or of the bribery of the Waziri themselves.</p>
			<p>A week passed, and Werper was no nearer the fulfillment of his plan, in so faras he could judge, than upon the day of his arrival, but at that very momentsomething occurred which gave him renewed hope and set his mind upon an evengreater reward than a woman’s ransom.</p>
			<p>A runner had arrived at the bungalow with the weekly mail, and Lord Greystokehad spent the afternoon in his study reading and answering letters. At dinnerhe seemed distraught, and early in the evening he excused himself and retired,Lady Greystoke following him very soon after. Werper, sitting upon the veranda,could hear their voices in earnest discussion, and having realized thatsomething of unusual moment was afoot, he quietly rose from his chair, andkeeping well in the shadow of the shrubbery growing profusely about thebungalow, made his silent way to a point beneath the window of the room inwhich his host and hostess slept.</p>
			<p>Here he listened, and not without result, for almost the first words heoverheard filled him with excitement. Lady Greystoke was speaking as Werpercame within hearing.</p>
			<p>“I always feared for the stability of the company,” she was saying;“but it seems incredible that they should have failed for so enormous asum⁠—unless there has been some dishonest manipulation.”</p>
			<p>“That is what I suspect,” replied Tarzan; “but whatever thecause, the fact remains that I have lost everything, and there is nothing forit but to return to Opar and get more.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, John,” cried Lady Greystoke, and Werper could feel the shudderthrough her voice, “is there no other way? I cannot bear to think of youreturning to that frightful city. I would rather live in poverty always than tohave you risk the hideous dangers of Opar.”</p>
			<p>“You need have no fear,” replied Tarzan, laughing. “I ampretty well able to take care of myself, and were I not, the Waziri who willaccompany me will see that no harm befalls me.”</p>
			<p>“They ran away from Opar once, and left you to your fate,” shereminded him.</p>
			<p>“They will not do it again,” he answered. “They were verymuch ashamed of themselves, and were coming back when I met them.”</p>
			<p>“But there must be some other way,” insisted the woman.</p>
			<p>“There is no other way half so easy to obtain another fortune, as to goto the treasure vaults of Opar and bring it away,” he replied. “Ishall be very careful, Jane, and the chances are that the inhabitants of Oparwill never know that I have been there again and despoiled them of anotherportion of the treasure, the very existence of which they are as ignorant of asthey would be of its value.”</p>
			<p>The finality in his tone seemed to assure Lady Greystoke that further argumentwas futile, and so she abandoned the subject.</p>
			<p>Werper remained, listening, for a short time, and then, confident that he hadoverheard all that was necessary and fearing discovery, returned to theveranda, where he smoked numerous cigarets in rapid succession before retiring.</p>
			<p>The following morning at breakfast, Werper announced his intention of making anearly departure, and asked Tarzan’s permission to hunt big game in theWaziri country on his way out⁠—permission which Lord Greystoke readilygranted.</p>
			<p>The Belgian consumed two days in completing his preparations, but finally gotaway with his safari, accompanied by a single Waziri guide whom Lord Greystokehad loaned him. The party made but a single short march when Werper simulatedillness, and announced his intention of remaining where he was until he hadfully recovered. As they had gone but a short distance from the Greystokebungalow, Werper dismissed the Waziri guide, telling the warrior that he wouldsend for him when he was able to proceed. The Waziri gone, the Belgian summonedone of Achmet Zek’s trusted blacks to his tent, and dispatched him towatch for the departure of Tarzan, returning immediately to advise Werper ofthe event and the direction taken by the Englishman.</p>
			<p>The Belgian did not have long to wait, for the following day his emissaryreturned with word that Tarzan and a party of fifty Waziri warriors had set outtoward the southeast early in the morning.</p>
			<p>Werper called his head man to him, after writing a long letter to Achmet Zek.This letter he handed to the head man.</p>
			<p>“Send a runner at once to Achmet Zek with this,” he instructed thehead man. “Remain here in camp awaiting further instructions from him orfrom me. If any come from the bungalow of the Englishman, tell them that I amvery ill within my tent and can see no one. Now, give me six porters and sixaskaris⁠—the strongest and bravest of the safari⁠—and I will marchafter the Englishman and discover where his gold is hidden.”</p>
			<p>And so it was that as Tarzan, stripped to the loin cloth and armed after theprimitive fashion he best loved, led his loyal Waziri toward the dead city ofOpar, Werper, the renegade, haunted his trail through the long, hot days, andcamped close behind him by night.</p>
			<p>And as they marched, Achmet Zek rode with his entire following southward towardthe Greystoke farm.</p>
			<p>To Tarzan of the Apes the expedition was in the nature of a holiday outing. Hiscivilization was at best but an outward veneer which he gladly peeled off withhis uncomfortable European clothes whenever any reasonable pretext presenteditself. It was a woman’s love which kept Tarzan even to the semblance ofcivilization⁠—a condition for which familiarity had bred contempt. Hehated the shams and the hypocrisies of it and with the clear vision of anunspoiled mind he had penetrated to the rotten core of the heart of thething⁠—the cowardly greed for peace and ease and the safeguarding ofproperty rights. That the fine things of life⁠—art, music andliterature⁠—had thriven upon such enervating ideals he strenuously denied,insisting, rather, that they had endured in spite of civilization.</p>
			<p>“Show me the fat, opulent coward,” he was wont to say, “whoever originated a beautiful ideal. In the clash of arms, in the battle forsurvival, amid hunger and death and danger, in the face of God as manifested inthe display of Nature’s most terrific forces, is born all that is finestand best in the human heart and mind.”</p>
			<p>And so Tarzan always came back to Nature in the spirit of a lover keeping along deferred tryst after a period behind prison walls. His Waziri, at marrow,were more civilized than he. They cooked their meat before they ate it and theyshunned many articles of food as unclean that Tarzan had eaten with gusto allhis life and so insidious is the virus of hypocrisy that even the stalwartape-man hesitated to give rein to his natural longings before them. He ateburnt flesh when he would have preferred it raw and unspoiled, and he broughtdown game with arrow or spear when he would far rather have leaped upon it fromambush and sunk his strong teeth in its jugular; but at last the call of themilk of the savage mother that had suckled him in infancy rose to an insistentdemand⁠—he craved the hot blood of a fresh kill and his muscles yearned topit themselves against the savage jungle in the battle for existence that hadbeen his sole birthright for the first twenty years of his life.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
