<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter XX: Jane Clayton Again a Prisoner</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Chapter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Jane Clayton Again a Prisoner</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Though her clothes were torn and her hair disheveled, Albert Werper realizedthat he never before had looked upon such a vision of loveliness as that whichLady Greystoke presented in the relief and joy which she felt in coming sounexpectedly upon a friend and rescuer when hope had seemed so far away.</p>
			<p>If the Belgian had entertained any doubts as to the woman’s knowledge ofhis part in the perfidious attack upon her home and herself, it was quicklydissipated by the genuine friendliness of her greeting. She told him quickly ofall that had befallen her since he had departed from her home, and as she spokeof the death of her husband her eyes were veiled by the tears which she couldnot repress.</p>
			<p>“I am shocked,” said Werper, in well-simulated sympathy; “butI am not surprised. That devil there,” and he pointed toward the body ofAchmet Zek, “has terrorized the entire country. Your Waziri are eitherexterminated, or have been driven out of their country, far to the south. Themen of Achmet Zek occupy the plain about your former home⁠—there isneither sanctuary nor escape in that direction. Our only hope lies in travelingnorthward as rapidly as we may, of coming to the camp of the raiders before theknowledge of Achmet Zek’s death reaches those who were left there, and ofobtaining, through some ruse, an escort toward the north.</p>
			<p>“I think that the thing can be accomplished, for I was a guest of theraider’s before I knew the nature of the man, and those at the camp arenot aware that I turned against him when I discovered his villainy.</p>
			<p>“Come! We will make all possible haste to reach the camp before those whoaccompanied Achmet Zek upon his last raid have found his body and carried thenews of his death to the cutthroats who remained behind. It is our only hope, Lady Greystoke, and you must place your entire faith in me if I am to succeed.Wait for me here a moment while I take from the Arab’s body the walletthat he stole from me,” and Werper stepped quickly to the deadman’s side, and, kneeling, sought with quick fingers the pouch of jewels.To his consternation, there was no sign of them in the garments of Achmet Zek.Rising, he walked back along the trail, searching for some trace of the missingpouch or its contents; but he found nothing, even though he searched carefullythe vicinity of his dead horse, and for a few paces into the jungle on eitherside. Puzzled, disappointed and angry, he at last returned to the girl.“The wallet is gone,” he explained, crisply, “and I dare notdelay longer in search of it. We must reach the camp before the returningraiders.”</p>
			<p>Unsuspicious of the man’s true character, Jane Clayton saw nothingpeculiar in his plans, or in his specious explanation of his former friendshipfor the raider, and so she grasped with alacrity the seeming hope for safetywhich he proffered her, and turning about she set out with Albert Werper towardthe hostile camp in which she so lately had been a prisoner.</p>
			<p>It was late in the afternoon of the second day before they reached theirdestination, and as they paused upon the edge of the clearing before the gatesof the walled village, Werper cautioned the girl to accede to whatever he mightsuggest by his conversation with the raiders.</p>
			<p>“I shall tell them,” he said, “that I apprehended you afteryou escaped from the camp, that I took you to Achmet Zek, and that as he wasengaged in a stubborn battle with the Waziri, he directed me to return to campwith you, to obtain here a sufficient guard, and to ride north with you asrapidly as possible and dispose of you at the most advantageous terms to acertain slave broker whose name he gave me.”</p>
			<p>Again the girl was deceived by the apparent frankness of the Belgian. Sherealized that desperate situations required desperate handling, and though shetrembled inwardly at the thought of again entering the vile and hideous villageof the raiders she saw no better course than that which her companion hadsuggested.</p>
			<p>Calling aloud to those who tended the gates, Werper, grasping Jane Clayton bythe arm, walked boldly across the clearing. Those who opened the gates to himpermitted their surprise to show clearly in their expressions. That thediscredited and hunted lieutenant should be thus returning fearlessly of hisown volition, seemed to disarm them quite as effectually as his manner towardLady Greystoke had deceived her.</p>
			<p>The sentries at the gate returned Werper’s salutations, and viewed withastonishment the prisoner whom he brought into the village with him.</p>
			<p>Immediately the Belgian sought the Arab who had been left in charge of the campduring Achmet Zek’s absence, and again his boldness disarmed suspicionand won the acceptance of his false explanation of his return. The fact that hehad brought back with him the woman prisoner who had escaped, added strength tohis claims, and Mohammed Beyd soon found himself fraternizing good-naturedlywith the very man whom he would have slain without compunction had hediscovered him alone in the jungle a half hour before.</p>
			<p>Jane Clayton was again confined to the prison hut she had formerly occupied, but as she realized that this was but a part of the deception which she andFrecoult were playing upon the credulous raiders, it was with quite a differentsensation that she again entered the vile and filthy interior, from that whichshe had previously experienced, when hope was so far away.</p>
			<p>Once more she was bound and sentries placed before the door of her prison; butbefore Werper left her he whispered words of cheer into her ear. Then he left, and made his way back to the tent of Mohammed Beyd. He had been wondering howlong it would be before the raiders who had ridden out with Achmet Zek wouldreturn with the murdered body of their chief, and the more he thought upon thematter the greater his fears became, that without accomplices his plan wouldfail.</p>
			<p>What, even, if he got away from the camp in safety before any returned with thetrue story of his guilt⁠—of what value would this advantage be other thanto protract for a few days his mental torture and his life? These hard riders, familiar with every trail and bypath, would get him long before he could hopeto reach the coast.</p>
			<p>As these thoughts passed through his mind he entered the tent where MohammedBeyd sat cross-legged upon a rug, smoking. The Arab looked up as the Europeancame into his presence.</p>
			<p>“Greetings, O Brother!” he said.</p>
			<p>“Greetings!” replied Werper.</p>
			<p>For a while neither spoke further. The Arab was the first to break the silence.</p>
			<p>“And my master, Achmet Zek, was well when last you saw him?” heasked.</p>
			<p>“Never was he safer from the sins and dangers of mortality,” replied the Belgian.</p>
			<p>“It is well,” said Mohammed Beyd, blowing a little puff of bluesmoke straight out before him.</p>
			<p>Again there was silence for several minutes.</p>
			<p>“And if he were dead?” asked the Belgian, determined to lead up tothe truth, and attempt to bribe Mohammed Beyd into his service.</p>
			<p>The Arab’s eyes narrowed and he leaned forward, his gaze boring straightinto the eyes of the Belgian.</p>
			<p>“I have been thinking much, Werper, since you returned so unexpectedly tothe camp of the man whom you had deceived, and who sought you with death in hisheart. I have been with Achmet Zek for many years⁠—his own mother neverknew him so well as I. He never forgives⁠—much less would he again trust aman who had once betrayed him; that I know.</p>
			<p>“I have thought much, as I said, and the result of my thinking hasassured me that Achmet Zek is dead⁠—for otherwise you would never havedared return to his camp, unless you be either a braver man or a bigger foolthan I have imagined. And, if this evidence of my judgment is not sufficient, Ihave but just now received from your own lips even more confirmatorywitness⁠—for did you not say that Achmet Zek was never more safe from thesins and dangers of mortality?</p>
			<p>“Achmet Zek is dead⁠—you need not deny it. I was not his mother, orhis mistress, so do not fear that my wailings shall disturb you. Tell me whyyou have come back here. Tell me what you want, and, Werper, if you stillpossess the jewels of which Achmet Zek told me, there is no reason why you andI should not ride north together and divide the ransom of the white woman andthe contents of the pouch you wear about your person. Eh?”</p>
			<p>The evil eyes narrowed, a vicious, thin-lipped smile tortured the villainousface, as Mohammed Beyd grinned knowingly into the face of the Belgian.</p>
			<p>Werper was both relieved and disturbed by the Arab’s attitude. Thecomplacency with which he accepted the death of his chief lifted a considerableburden of apprehension from the shoulders of Achmet Zek’s assassin; buthis demand for a share of the jewels boded ill for Werper when Mohammed Beydshould have learned that the precious stones were no longer in theBelgian’s possession.</p>
			<p>To acknowledge that he had lost the jewels might be to arouse the wrath orsuspicion of the Arab to such an extent as would jeopardize his new-foundchances of escape. His one hope seemed, then, to lie in fostering MohammedBeyd’s belief that the jewels were still in his possession, and dependupon the accidents of the future to open an avenue of escape.</p>
			<p>Could he contrive to tent with the Arab upon the march north, he might findopportunity in plenty to remove this menace to his life and liberty⁠—itwas worth trying, and, further, there seemed no other way out of hisdifficulty.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” he said, “Achmet Zek is dead. He fell in battle with acompany of Abyssinian cavalry that held me captive. During the fighting Iescaped; but I doubt if any of Achmet Zek’s men live, and the gold theysought is in the possession of the Abyssinians. Even now they are doubtlessmarching on this camp, for they were sent by Menelek to punish Achmet Zek andhis followers for a raid upon an Abyssinian village. There are many of them, and if we do not make haste to escape we shall all suffer the same fate asAchmet Zek.”</p>
			<p>Mohammed Beyd listened in silence. How much of the unbeliever’s story hemight safely believe he did not know; but as it afforded him an excuse fordeserting the village and making for the north he was not inclined tocross-question the Belgian too minutely.</p>
			<p>“And if I ride north with you,” he asked, “half the jewelsand half the ransom of the woman shall be mine?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” replied Werper.</p>
			<p>“Good,” said Mohammed Beyd. “I go now to give the order forthe breaking of camp early on the morrow,” and he rose to leave the tent.</p>
			<p>Werper laid a detaining hand upon his arm.</p>
			<p>“Wait,” he said, “let us determine how many shall accompanyus. It is not well that we be burdened by the women and children, for thenindeed we might be overtaken by the Abyssinians. It would be far better toselect a small guard of your bravest men, and leave word behind that we are riding <em>west</em>. Then, when the Abyssinians come they will be put upon the wrongtrail should they have it in their hearts to pursue us, and if they do not theywill at least ride north with less rapidity than as though they thought that wewere ahead of them.”</p>
			<p>“The serpent is less wise than thou, Werper,” said Mohammed Beydwith a smile. “It shall be done as you say. Twenty men shall accompanyus, and we shall ride <i>west</i>⁠—when we leave the village.”</p>
			<p>“Good,” cried the Belgian, and so it was arranged.</p>
			<p>Early the next morning Jane Clayton, after an almost sleepless night, wasaroused by the sound of voices outside her prison, and a moment later, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Frecoult, and two Arabs entered. The latter unbound her ankles and lifted herto her feet. Then her wrists were loosed, she was given a handful of dry bread, and led out into the faint light of dawn.</p>
			<p>She looked questioningly at Frecoult, and at a moment that the Arab’sattention was attracted in another direction the man leaned toward her andwhispered that all was working out as he had planned. Thus assured, the youngwoman felt a renewal of the hope which the long and miserable night of bondagehad almost expunged.</p>
			<p>Shortly after, she was lifted to the back of a horse, and surrounded by Arabs, was escorted through the gateway of the village and off into the jungle towardthe west. Half an hour later the party turned north, and northerly was theirdirection for the balance of the march.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Frecoult spoke with her but seldom, and she understood that in carrying outhis deception he must maintain the semblance of her captor, rather thanprotector, and so she suspected nothing though she saw the friendly relationswhich seemed to exist between the European and the Arab leader of the band.</p>
			<p>If Werper succeeded in keeping himself from conversation with the young woman, he failed signally to expel her from his thoughts. A hundred times a day hefound his eyes wandering in her direction and feasting themselves upon hercharms of face and figure. Each hour his infatuation for her grew, until hisdesire to possess her gained almost the proportions of madness.</p>
			<p>If either the girl or Mohammed Beyd could have guessed what passed in the mindof the man which each thought a friend and ally, the apparent harmony of thelittle company would have been rudely disturbed.</p>
			<p>Werper had not succeeded in arranging to tent with Mohammed Beyd, and so herevolved many plans for the assassination of the Arab that would have beengreatly simplified had he been permitted to share the other’s nightlyshelter.</p>
			<p>Upon the second day out Mohammed Beyd reined his horse to the side of theanimal on which the captive was mounted. It was, apparently, the first noticewhich the Arab had taken of the girl; but many times during these two days hadhis cunning eyes peered greedily from beneath the hood of his burnoose to gloatupon the beauties of the prisoner.</p>
			<p>Nor was this hidden infatuation of any recent origin. He had conceived it whenfirst the wife of the Englishman had fallen into the hands of Achmet Zek; butwhile that austere chieftain lived, Mohammed Beyd had not even dared hope for arealization of his imaginings.</p>
			<p>Now, though, it was different⁠—only a despised dog of a Christian stoodbetween himself and possession of the girl. How easy it would be to slay theunbeliever, and take unto himself both the woman and the jewels! With thelatter in his possession, the ransom which might be obtained for the captivewould form no great inducement to her relinquishment in the face of thepleasures of sole ownership of her. Yes, he would kill Werper, retain all thejewels and keep the Englishwoman.</p>
			<p>He turned his eyes upon her as she rode along at his side. How beautiful showas! His fingers opened and closed⁠—skinny, brown talons itching to feelthe soft flesh of the victim in their remorseless clutch.</p>
			<p>“Do you know,” he asked leaning toward her, “where this manwould take you?”</p>
			<p>Jane Clayton nodded affirmatively.</p>
			<p>“And you are willing to become the plaything of a black sultan?”</p>
			<p>The girl drew herself up to her full height, and turned her head away; but shedid not reply. She feared lest her knowledge of the ruse that <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Frecoult wasplaying upon the Arab might cause her to betray herself through an insufficientdisplay of terror and aversion.</p>
			<p>“You can escape this fate,” continued the Arab; “MohammedBeyd will save you,” and he reached out a brown hand and seized thefingers of her right hand in a grasp so sudden and so fierce that his brutalpassion was revealed as clearly in the act as though his lips had confessed itin words. Jane Clayton wrenched herself from his grasp.</p>
			<p>“You beast!” she cried. “Leave me or I shall call <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Frecoult.”</p>
			<p>Mohammed Beyd drew back with a scowl. His thin, upper lip curled upward, revealing his smooth, white teeth.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Frecoult?” he jeered. “There is no such person. Theman’s name is Werper. He is a liar, a thief, and a murderer. He killedhis captain in the Congo country and fled to the protection of Achmet Zek. Heled Achmet Zek to the plunder of your home. He followed your husband, andplanned to steal his gold from him. He has told me that you think him yourprotector, and he has played upon this to win your confidence that it might beeasier to carry you north and sell you into some black sultan’s harem.Mohammed Beyd is your only hope,” and with this assertion to provide thecaptive with food for thought, the Arab spurred forward toward the head of thecolumn.</p>
			<p>Jane Clayton could not know how much of Mohammed Beyd’s indictment mightbe true, or how much false; but at least it had the effect of dampening herhopes and causing her to review with suspicion every past act of the man uponwhom she had been looking as her sole protector in the midst of a world ofenemies and dangers.</p>
			<p>On the march a separate tent had been provided for the captive, and at night itwas pitched between those of Mohammed Beyd and Werper. A sentry was posted atthe front and another at the back, and with these precautions it had not beenthought necessary to confine the prisoner to bonds. The evening following herinterview with Mohammed Beyd, Jane Clayton sat for some time at the opening ofher tent watching the rough activities of the camp. She had eaten the meal thathad been brought her by Mohammed Beyd’s Negro slave⁠—a meal ofcassava cakes and a nondescript stew in which a new-killed monkey, a couple ofsquirrels and the remains of a zebra, slain the previous day, were impartiallyand unsavorily combined; but the onetime Baltimore belle had long sincesubmerged in the stern battle for existence, an estheticism which formerlyrevolted at much slighter provocation.</p>
			<p>As the girl’s eyes wandered across the trampled jungle clearing, alreadysqualid from the presence of man, she no longer apprehended either the nearerobjects of the foreground, the uncouth men laughing or quarreling amongthemselves, or the jungle beyond, which circumscribed the extreme range of hermaterial vision. Her gaze passed through all these, unseeing, to center itselfupon a distant bungalow and scenes of happy security which brought to her eyestears of mingled joy and sorrow. She saw a tall, broad-shouldered man riding infrom distant fields; she saw herself waiting to greet him with an armful offresh-cut roses from the bushes which flanked the little rustic gate beforeher. All this was gone, vanished into the past, wiped out by the torches andbullets and hatred of these hideous and degenerate men. With a stifled sob, anda little shudder, Jane Clayton turned back into her tent and sought the pile ofunclean blankets which were her bed. Throwing herself face downward upon themshe sobbed forth her misery until kindly sleep brought her, at least temporary, relief.</p>
			<p>And while she slept a figure stole from the tent that stood to the right ofhers. It approached the sentry before the doorway and whispered a few words inthe man’s ear. The latter nodded, and strode off through the darkness inthe direction of his own blankets. The figure passed to the rear of JaneClayton’s tent and spoke again to the sentry there, and this man alsoleft, following in the trail of the first.</p>
			<p>Then he who had sent them away stole silently to the tent flap and untying thefastenings entered with the noiselessness of a disembodied spirit.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
