<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title><em>xiv</em></title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2><span epub:type="label">Chapter</span> <span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman"><em>xiv</em></span></h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Priestess But Yet a Woman</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>At first La closed her eyes and clung to Tarzan in terror, though she made nooutcry; but presently she gained sufficient courage to look about her, to lookdown at the ground beneath and even to keep her eyes open during the wide,perilous swings from tree to tree, and then there came over her a sense ofsafety because of her confidence in the perfect physical creature in whosestrength and nerve and agility her fate lay. Once she raised her eyes to theburning sun and murmured a prayer of thanks to her pagan god that she had notbeen permitted to destroy this godlike man, and her long lashes were wet withtears. A strange anomaly was La of Opar⁠—a creature of circumstance tornby conflicting emotions. Now the cruel and bloodthirsty creature of a heartlessgod and again a melting woman filled with compassion and tenderness. Sometimesthe incarnation of jealousy and revenge and sometimes a sobbing maiden,generous and forgiving; at once a virgin and a wanton; but always⁠—awoman. Such was La.</p>
			<p>She pressed her cheek close to Tarzan’s shoulder. Slowly she turned herhead until her hot lips were pressed against his flesh. She loved him and wouldgladly have died for him; yet within an hour she had been ready to plunge aknife into his heart and might again within the coming hour.</p>
			<p>A hapless priest seeking shelter in the jungle chanced to show himself toenraged Tantor. The great beast turned to one side, bore down upon the crooked,little man, snuffed him out and then, diverted from his course, blundered awaytoward the south. In a few minutes even the noise of his trumpeting was lost inthe distance.</p>
			<p>Tarzan dropped to the ground and La slipped to her feet from his back.“Call your people together,” said Tarzan.</p>
			<p>“They will kill me,” replied La.</p>
			<p>“They will not kill you,” contradicted the ape-man. “No onewill kill you while Tarzan of the Apes is here. Call them and we will talk withthem.”</p>
			<p>La raised her voice in a weird, flutelike call that carried far into the jungleon every side. From near and far came answering shouts in the barking tones ofthe Oparian priests: “We come! We come!” Again and again, Larepeated her summons until singly and in pairs the greater portion of herfollowing approached and halted a short distance away from the High Priestessand her savior. They came with scowling brows and threatening mien. When allhad come Tarzan addressed them.</p>
			<p>“Your La is safe,” said the ape-man. “Had she slain me shewould now herself be dead and many more of you; but she spared me that I mightsave her. Go your way with her back to Opar, and Tarzan will go his way intothe jungle. Let there be peace always between Tarzan and La. What is youranswer?”</p>
			<p>The priests grumbled and shook their heads. They spoke together and La andTarzan could see that they were not favorably inclined toward the proposition.They did not wish to take La back and they did wish to complete the sacrificeof Tarzan to the Flaming God. At last the ape-man became impatient.</p>
			<p>“You will obey the commands of your queen,” he said, “and goback to Opar with her or Tarzan of the Apes will call together the othercreatures of the jungle and slay you all. La saved me that I might save you andher. I have served you better alive than I could have dead. If you are not allfools you will let me go my way in peace and you will return to Opar with La. Iknow not where the sacred knife is; but you can fashion another. Had I nottaken it from La you would have slain me and now your god must be glad that Itook it since I have saved his priestess from love-mad Tantor. Will you go backto Opar with La, promising that no harm shall befall her?”</p>
			<p>The priests gathered together in a little knot arguing and discussing. Theypounded upon their breasts with their fists; they raised their hands and eyesto their fiery god; they growled and barked among themselves until it becameevident to Tarzan that one of their number was preventing the acceptance of hisproposal. This was the High Priest whose heart was filled with jealous ragebecause La openly acknowledged her love for the stranger, when by the worldlycustoms of their cult she should have belonged to him. Seemingly there was tobe no solution of the problem until another priest stepped forth and, raisinghis hand, addressed La.</p>
			<p>“Cadj, the High Priest,” he announced, “would sacrifice youboth to the Flaming God; but all of us except Cadj would gladly return to Oparwith our queen.”</p>
			<p>“You are many against one,” spoke up Tarzan. “Why should younot have your will? Go your way with La to Opar and if Cadj interferes slayhim.”</p>
			<p>The priests of Opar welcomed this suggestion with loud cries of approval. Tothem it appeared nothing short of divine inspiration. The influence of ages ofunquestioning obedience to high priests had made it seem impossible to them toquestion his authority; but when they realized that they could force him totheir will they were as happy as children with new toys.</p>
			<p>They rushed forward and seized Cadj. They talked in loud menacing tones intohis ear. They threatened him with bludgeon and knife until at last heacquiesced in their demands, though sullenly, and then Tarzan stepped closebefore Cadj.</p>
			<p>“Priest,” he said, “La goes back to her temple under theprotection of her priests and the threat of Tarzan of the Apes that whoeverharms her shall die. Tarzan will go again to Opar before the next rains and ifharm has befallen La, woe betide Cadj, the High Priest.”</p>
			<p>Sullenly Cadj promised not to harm his queen.</p>
			<p>“Protect her,” cried Tarzan to the other Oparians. “Protecther so that when Tarzan comes again he will find La there to greet him.”</p>
			<p>“La will be there to greet thee,” exclaimed the High Priestess,“and La will wait, longing, always longing, until you come again. Oh,tell me that you will come!”</p>
			<p>“Who knows?” asked the ape-man as he swung quickly into the treesand raced off toward the east.</p>
			<p>For a moment La stood looking after him, then her head drooped, a sigh escapedher lips and like an old woman she took up the march toward distant Opar.</p>
			<p>Through the trees raced Tarzan of the Apes until the darkness of night hadsettled upon the jungle, then he lay down and slept, with no thought beyond themorrow and with even La but the shadow of a memory within his consciousness.</p>
			<p>But a few marches to the north Lady Greystoke looked forward to the day whenher mighty lord and master should discover the crime of Achmet Zek, and bespeeding to rescue and avenge, and even as she pictured the coming of JohnClayton, the object of her thoughts squatted almost naked, beside a fallen log,beneath which he was searching with grimy fingers for a chance beetle or aluscious grub.</p>
			<p class="p2">Two days elapsed following the theft of the jewels before Tarzan gave them athought. Then, as they chanced to enter his mind, he conceived a desire to playwith them again, and, having nothing better to do than satisfy the first whimwhich possessed him, he rose and started across the plain from the forest inwhich he had spent the preceding day.</p>
			<p>Though no mark showed where the gems had been buried, and though the spotresembled the balance of an unbroken stretch several miles in length, where thereeds terminated at the edge of the meadowland, yet the ape-man moved withunerring precision directly to the place where he had hid his treasure.</p>
			<p>With his hunting knife he upturned the loose earth, beneath which the pouchshould be; but, though he excavated to a greater distance than the depth of theoriginal hole there was no sign of pouch or jewels. Tarzan’s brow cloudedas he discovered that he had been despoiled. Little or no reasoning wasrequired to convince him of the identity of the guilty party, and with the samecelerity that had marked his decision to unearth the jewels, he set out uponthe trail of the thief.</p>
			<p>Though the spoor was two days old, and practically obliterated in many places,Tarzan followed it with comparative ease. A white man could not have followedit twenty paces twelve hours after it had been made, a black man would havelost it within the first mile; but Tarzan of the Apes had been forced inchildhood to develop senses that an ordinary mortal scarce ever uses.</p>
			<p>We may note the garlic and whisky on the breath of a fellow strap hanger, orthe cheap perfume emanating from the person of the wondrous lady sitting infront of us, and deplore the fact of our sensitive noses; but, as a matter offact, we cannot smell at all, our olfactory organs are practically atrophied,by comparison with the development of the sense among the beasts of the wild.</p>
			<p>Where a foot is placed an effluvium remains for a considerable time. It isbeyond the range of our sensibilities; but to a creature of the lower orders,especially to the hunters and the hunted, as interesting and ofttimes morelucid than is the printed page to us.</p>
			<p>Nor was Tarzan dependent alone upon his sense of smell. Vision and hearing hadbeen brought to a marvelous state of development by the necessities of hisearly life, where survival itself depended almost daily upon the exercise ofthe keenest vigilance and the constant use of all his faculties.</p>
			<p>And so he followed the old trail of the Belgian through the forest and towardthe north; but because of the age of the trail he was constrained to a far fromrapid progress. The man he followed was two days ahead of him when Tarzan tookup the pursuit, and each day he gained upon the ape-man. The latter, however,felt not the slightest doubt as to the outcome. Some day he would overhaul hisquarry⁠—he could bide his time in peace until that day dawned. Doggedly hefollowed the faint spoor, pausing by day only to kill and eat, and at nightonly to sleep and refresh himself.</p>
			<p>Occasionally he passed parties of savage warriors; but these he gave a wideberth, for he was hunting with a purpose that was not to be distracted by theminor accidents of the trail.</p>
			<p>These parties were of the collecting hordes of the Waziri and their allieswhich Basuli had scattered his messengers broadcast to summon. They weremarching to a common rendezvous in preparation for an assault upon thestronghold of Achmet Zek; but to Tarzan they were enemies⁠—he retained noconscious memory of any friendship for the black men.</p>
			<p>It was night when he halted outside the palisaded village of the Arab raider.Perched in the branches of a great tree he gazed down upon the life within theenclosure. To this place had the spoor led him. His quarry must be within; buthow was he to find him among so many huts? Tarzan, although cognizant of hismighty powers, realized also his limitations. He knew that he could notsuccessfully cope with great numbers in open battle. He must resort to thestealth and trickery of the wild beast, if he were to succeed.</p>
			<p>Sitting in the safety of his tree, munching upon the leg bone of Horta, theboar, Tarzan waited a favorable opportunity to enter the village. For awhile hegnawed at the bulging, round ends of the large bone, splintering off smallpieces between his strong jaws, and sucking at the delicious marrow within; butall the time he cast repeated glances into the village. He saw white-robedfigures, and half-naked blacks; but not once did he see one who resembled thestealer of the gems.</p>
			<p>Patiently he waited until the streets were deserted by all save the sentries atthe gates, then he dropped lightly to the ground, circled to the opposite sideof the village and approached the palisade.</p>
			<p>At his side hung a long, rawhide rope⁠—a natural and more dependableevolution from the grass rope of his childhood. Loosening this, he spread thenoose upon the ground behind him, and with a quick movement of his wrist tossedthe coils over one of the sharpened projections of the summit of the palisade.</p>
			<p>Drawing the noose taut, he tested the solidity of its hold. Satisfied, theape-man ran nimbly up the vertical wall, aided by the rope which he clutched inboth hands. Once at the top it required but a moment to gather the danglingrope once more into its coils, make it fast again at his waist, take a quickglance downward within the palisade, and, assured that no one lurked directlybeneath him, drop softly to the ground.</p>
			<p>Now he was within the village. Before him stretched a series of tents andnative huts. The business of exploring each of them would be fraught withdanger; but danger was only a natural factor of each day’s life⁠—itnever appalled Tarzan. The chances appealed to him⁠—the chances of lifeand death, with his prowess and his faculties pitted against those of a worthyantagonist.</p>
			<p>It was not necessary that he enter each habitation⁠—through a door, awindow or an open chink, his nose told him whether or not his prey lay within.For some time he found one disappointment following upon the heels of anotherin quick succession. No spoor of the Belgian was discernible. But at last hecame to a tent where the smell of the thief was strong. Tarzan listened, hisear close to the canvas at the rear, but no sound came from within.</p>
			<p>At last he cut one of the pin ropes, raised the bottom of the canvas, andintruded his head within the interior. All was quiet and dark. Tarzan crawledcautiously within⁠—the scent of the Belgian was strong; but it was notlive scent. Even before he had examined the interior minutely, Tarzan knew thatno one was within it.</p>
			<p>In one corner he found a pile of blankets and clothing scattered about; but nopouch of pretty pebbles. A careful examination of the balance of the tentrevealed nothing more, at least nothing to indicate the presence of the jewels;but at the side where the blankets and clothing lay, the ape-man discoveredthat the tent wall had been loosened at the bottom, and presently he sensedthat the Belgian had recently passed out of the tent by this avenue.</p>
			<p>Tarzan was not long in following the way that his prey had fled. The spoor ledalways in the shadow and at the rear of the huts and tents of thevillage⁠—it was quite evident to Tarzan that the Belgian had gone aloneand secretly upon his mission. Evidently he feared the inhabitants of thevillage, or at least his work had been of such a nature that he dared not riskdetection.</p>
			<p>At the back of a native hut the spoor led through a small hole recently cut inthe brush wall and into the dark interior beyond. Fearlessly, Tarzan followedthe trail. On hands and knees, he crawled through the small aperture. Withinthe hut his nostrils were assailed by many odors; but clear and distinct amongthem was one that half aroused a latent memory of the past⁠—it was thefaint and delicate odor of a woman. With the cognizance of it there rose in thebreast of the ape-man a strange uneasiness⁠—the result of an irresistibleforce which he was destined to become acquainted with anew⁠—the instinctwhich draws the male to his mate.</p>
			<p>In the same hut was the scent spoor of the Belgian, too, and as both theseassailed the nostrils of the ape-man, mingling one with the other, a jealousrage leaped and burned within him, though his memory held before the mirror ofrecollection no image of the she to which he had attached his desire.</p>
			<p>Like the tent he had investigated, the hut, too, was empty, and aftersatisfying himself that his stolen pouch was secreted nowhere within, he left,as he had entered, by the hole in the rear wall.</p>
			<p>Here he took up the spoor of the Belgian, followed it across the clearing, overthe palisade, and out into the dark jungle beyond.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
