<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title><em>xxii</em></title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2><span epub:type="label">Chapter</span> <span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman"><em>xxii</em></span></h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Tarzan Recovers His Reason</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>As Tarzan let the pebbles from the recovered pouch run through his fingers, histhoughts returned to the pile of yellow ingots about which the Arabs and theAbyssinians had waged their relentless battle.</p>
			<p>What was there in common between that pile of dirty metal and the beautiful,sparkling pebbles that had formerly been in his pouch? What was the metal? Fromwhence had it come? What was that tantalizing half-conviction which seemed todemand the recognition of his memory that the yellow pile for which these menhad fought and died had been intimately connected with his past⁠—that ithad been his?</p>
			<p>What had been his past? He shook his head. Vaguely the memory of his apishchildhood passed slowly in review⁠—then came a strangely tangled mass offaces, figures and events which seemed to have no relation to Tarzan of theApes, and yet which were, even in their fragmentary form, familiar.</p>
			<p>Slowly and painfully, recollection was attempting to reassert itself, the hurtbrain was mending, as the cause of its recent failure to function was beingslowly absorbed or removed by the healing processes of perfect circulation.</p>
			<p>The people who now passed before his mind’s eye for the first time inweeks wore familiar faces; but yet he could neither place them in the nichesthey had once filled in his past life, nor call them by name. One was a fairshe, and it was her face which most often moved through the tangledrecollections of his convalescing brain. Who was she? What had she been toTarzan of the Apes? He seemed to see her about the very spot upon which thepile of gold had been unearthed by the Abyssinians; but the surroundings werevastly different from those which now obtained.</p>
			<p>There was a building⁠—there were many buildings⁠—and there werehedges, fences, and flowers. Tarzan puckered his brow in puzzled study of thewonderful problem. For an instant he seemed to grasp the whole of a trueexplanation, and then, just as success was within his grasp, the picture fadedinto a jungle scene where a naked, white youth danced in company with a band ofhairy, primordial ape-things.</p>
			<p>Tarzan shook his head and sighed. Why was it that he could not recollect? Atleast he was sure that in some way the pile of gold, the place where it lay,the subtle aroma of the elusive she he had been pursuing, the memory figure ofthe white woman, and he himself, were inextricably connected by the ties of aforgotten past.</p>
			<p>If the woman belonged there, what better place to search or await her than thevery spot which his broken recollections seemed to assign to her? It was worthtrying. Tarzan slipped the thong of the empty pouch over his shoulder andstarted off through the trees in the direction of the plain.</p>
			<p>At the outskirts of the forest he met the Arabs returning in search of AchmetZek. Hiding, he let them pass, and then resumed his way toward the charredruins of the home he had been almost upon the point of recalling to his memory.</p>
			<p>His journey across the plain was interrupted by the discovery of a small herdof antelope in a little swale, where the cover and the wind were well combinedto make stalking easy. A fat yearling rewarded a half hour of stealthy creepingand a sudden, savage rush, and it was late in the afternoon when the ape-mansettled himself upon his haunches beside his kill to enjoy the fruits of hisskill, his cunning, and his prowess.</p>
			<p>His hunger satisfied, thirst next claimed his attention. The river lured him bythe shortest path toward its refreshing waters, and when he had drunk, nightalready had fallen and he was some half mile or more down stream from the pointwhere he had seen the pile of yellow ingots, and where he hoped to meet thememory woman, or find some clue to her whereabouts or her identity.</p>
			<p>To the jungle bred, time is usually a matter of small moment, and haste, exceptwhen engendered by terror, by rage, or by hunger, is distasteful. Today wasgone. Therefore tomorrow, of which there was an infinite procession, wouldanswer admirably for Tarzan’s further quest. And, besides, the ape-manwas tired and would sleep.</p>
			<p>A tree afforded him the safety, seclusion and comforts of a well-appointedbedchamber, and to the chorus of the hunters and the hunted of the wild riverbank he soon dropped off into deep slumber.</p>
			<p>Morning found him both hungry and thirsty again, and dropping from his tree hemade his way to the drinking place at the river’s edge. There he foundNuma, the lion, ahead of him. The big fellow was lapping the water greedily,and at the approach of Tarzan along the trail in his rear, he raised his head,and turning his gaze backward across his maned shoulders glared at theintruder. A low growl of warning rumbled from his throat; but Tarzan, guessingthat the beast had but just quitted his kill and was well filled, merely made aslight detour and continued to the river, where he stopped a few yards abovethe tawny cat, and dropping upon his hands and knees plunged his face into thecool water. For a moment the lion continued to eye the man; then he resumed hisdrinking, and man and beast quenched their thirst side by side each apparentlyoblivious of the other’s presence.</p>
			<p>Numa was the first to finish. Raising his head, he gazed across the river for afew minutes with that stony fixity of attention which is a characteristic ofhis kind. But for the ruffling of his black mane to the touch of the passingbreeze he might have been wrought from golden bronze, so motionless, sostatuesque his pose.</p>
			<p>A deep sigh from the cavernous lungs dispelled the illusion. The mighty headswung slowly around until the yellow eyes rested upon the man. The bristled lipcurved upward, exposing yellow fangs. Another warning growl vibrated the heavyjowls, and the king of beasts turned majestically about and paced slowly up thetrail into the dense reeds.</p>
			<p>Tarzan of the Apes drank on, but from the corners of his gray eyes he watchedthe great brute’s every move until he had disappeared from view, and,after, his keen ears marked the movements of the carnivore.</p>
			<p>A plunge in the river was followed by a scant breakfast of eggs which chancediscovered to him, and then he set off up river toward the ruins of thebungalow where the golden ingots had marked the center of yesterday’sbattle.</p>
			<p>And when he came upon the spot, great was his surprise and consternation, forthe yellow metal had disappeared. The earth, trampled by the feet of horses andmen, gave no clue. It was as though the ingots had evaporated into thin air.</p>
			<p>The ape-man was at a loss to know where to turn or what next to do. There wasno sign of any spoor which might denote that the she had been here. The metalwas gone, and if there was any connection between the she and the metal itseemed useless to wait for her now that the latter had been removed elsewhere.</p>
			<p>Everything seemed to elude him⁠—the pretty pebbles, the yellow metal, theshe, his memory. Tarzan was disgusted. He would go back into the jungle andlook for Chulk, and so he turned his steps once more toward the forest. Hemoved rapidly, swinging across the plain in a long, easy trot, and at the edgeof the forest, taking to the trees with the agility and speed of a smallmonkey.</p>
			<p>His direction was aimless⁠—he merely raced on and on through the jungle,the joy of unfettered action his principal urge, with the hope of stumblingupon some clue to Chulk or the she, a secondary incentive.</p>
			<p>For two days he roamed about, killing, eating, drinking and sleeping whereverinclination and the means to indulge it occurred simultaneously. It was uponthe morning of the third day that the scent spoor of horse and man were waftedfaintly to his nostrils. Instantly he altered his course to glide silentlythrough the branches in the direction from which the scent came.</p>
			<p>It was not long before he came upon a solitary horseman riding toward the east.Instantly his eyes confirmed what his nose had previously suspected⁠—therider was he who had stolen his pretty pebbles. The light of rage flaredsuddenly in the gray eyes as the ape-man dropped lower among the branches untilhe moved almost directly above the unconscious Werper.</p>
			<p>There was a quick leap, and the Belgian felt a heavy body hurtle onto the rumpof his terror-stricken mount. The horse, snorting, leaped forward. Giant armsencircled the rider, and in the twinkling of an eye he was dragged from hissaddle to find himself lying in the narrow trail with a naked, white giantkneeling upon his breast.</p>
			<p>Recognition came to Werper with the first glance at his captor’s face,and a pallor of fear overspread his features. Strong fingers were at histhroat, fingers of steel. He tried to cry out, to plead for his life; but thecruel fingers denied him speech, as they were as surely denying him life.</p>
			<p>“The pretty pebbles?” cried the man upon his breast. “Whatdid you with the pretty pebbles⁠—with Tarzan’s prettypebbles?”</p>
			<p>The fingers relaxed to permit a reply. For some time Werper could only chokeand cough⁠—at last he regained the powers of speech.</p>
			<p>“Achmet Zek, the Arab, stole them from me,” he cried; “hemade me give up the pouch and the pebbles.”</p>
			<p>“I saw all that,” replied Tarzan; “but the pebbles in thepouch were not the pebbles of Tarzan⁠—they were only such pebbles as fillthe bottoms of the rivers, and the shelving banks beside them. Even the Arabwould not have them, for he threw them away in anger when he had looked uponthem. It is my pretty pebbles that I want⁠—where are they?”</p>
			<p>“I do not know, I do not know,” cried Werper. “I gave them toAchmet Zek or he would have killed me. A few minutes later he followed me alongthe trail to slay me, although he had promised to molest me no further, and Ishot and killed him; but the pouch was not upon his person and though Isearched about the jungle for some time I could not find it.”</p>
			<p>“I found it, I tell you,” growled Tarzan, “and I also foundthe pebbles which Achmet Zek had thrown away in disgust. They were notTarzan’s pebbles. You have hidden them! Tell me where they are or I willkill you,” and the brown fingers of the ape-man closed a little tighterupon the throat of his victim.</p>
			<p>Werper struggled to free himself. “My God, Lord Greystoke,” hemanaged to scream, “would you commit murder for a handful ofstones?”</p>
			<p>The fingers at his throat relaxed, a puzzled, faraway expression softened thegray eyes.</p>
			<p>“Lord Greystoke!” repeated the ape-man. “Lord Greystoke! Whois Lord Greystoke? Where have I heard that name before?”</p>
			<p>“Why man, you are Lord Greystoke,” cried the Belgian. “Youwere injured by a falling rock when the earthquake shattered the passage to theunderground chamber to which you and your black Waziri had come to fetch goldeningots back to your bungalow. The blow shattered your memory. You are JohnClayton, Lord Greystoke⁠—don’t you remember?”</p>
			<p>“John Clayton, Lord Greystoke!” repeated Tarzan. Then for a momenthe was silent. Presently his hand went falteringly to his forehead, anexpression of wonderment filled his eyes⁠—of wonderment and suddenunderstanding. The forgotten name had reawakened the returning memory that hadbeen struggling to reassert itself. The ape-man relinquished his grasp upon thethroat of the Belgian, and leaped to his feet.</p>
			<p>“God!” he cried, and then, “Jane!” Suddenly he turnedtoward Werper. “My wife?” he asked. “What has become of her?The farm is in ruins. You know. You have had something to do with all this. Youfollowed me to Opar, you stole the jewels which I thought but pretty pebbles.You are a crook! Do not try to tell me that you are not.”</p>
			<p>“He is worse than a crook,” said a quiet voice close behind them.</p>
			<p>Tarzan turned in astonishment to see a tall man in uniform standing in thetrail a few paces from him. Back of the man were a number of black soldiers inthe uniform of the Congo Free State.</p>
			<p>“He is a murderer, Monsieur,” continued the officer. “I havefollowed him for a long time to take him back to stand trial for the killing ofhis superior officer.”</p>
			<p>Werper was upon his feet now, gazing, white and trembling, at the fate whichhad overtaken him even in the fastness of the labyrinthine jungle.Instinctively he turned to flee; but Tarzan of the Apes reached out a stronghand and grasped him by the shoulder.</p>
			<p>“Wait!” said the ape-man to his captive. “This gentlemanwishes you, and so do I. When I am through with you, he may have you. Tell mewhat has become of my wife.”</p>
			<p>The Belgian officer eyed the almost naked, white giant with curiosity. He notedthe strange contrast of primitive weapons and apparel, and the easy, fluentFrench which the man spoke. The former denoted the lowest, the latter thehighest type of culture. He could not quite determine the social status of thisstrange creature; but he knew that he did not relish the easy assurance withwhich the fellow presumed to dictate when he might take possession of theprisoner.</p>
			<p>“Pardon me,” he said, stepping forward and placing his hand onWerper’s other shoulder; “but this gentleman is my prisoner. Hemust come with me.”</p>
			<p>“When I am through with him,” replied Tarzan, quietly.</p>
			<p>The officer turned and beckoned to the soldiers standing in the trail behindhim. A company of uniformed blacks stepped quickly forward and pushing past thethree, surrounded the ape-man and his captive.</p>
			<p>“Both the law and the power to enforce it are upon my side,”announced the officer. “Let us have no trouble. If you have a grievanceagainst this man you may return with me and enter your charge regularly beforean authorized tribunal.”</p>
			<p>“Your legal rights are not above suspicion, my friend,” repliedTarzan, “and your power to enforce your commands are onlyapparent⁠—not real. You have presumed to enter British territory with anarmed force. Where is your authority for this invasion? Where are theextradition papers which warrant the arrest of this man? And what assurancehave you that I cannot bring an armed force about you that will prevent yourreturn to the Congo Free State?”</p>
			<p>The Belgian lost his temper. “I have no disposition to argue with a nakedsavage,” he cried. “Unless you wish to be hurt you will notinterfere with me. Take the prisoner, Sergeant!”</p>
			<p>Werper raised his lips close to Tarzan’s ear. “Keep me from them,and I can show you the very spot where I saw your wife last night,” hewhispered. “She cannot be far from here at this very minute.”</p>
			<p>The soldiers, following the signal from their sergeant, closed in to seizeWerper. Tarzan grabbed the Belgian about the waist, and bearing him beneath hisarm as he might have borne a sack of flour, leaped forward in an attempt tobreak through the cordon. His right fist caught the nearest soldier upon thejaw and sent him hurtling backward upon his fellows. Clubbed rifles were tornfrom the hands of those who barred his way, and right and left the blacksoldiers stumbled aside in the face of the ape-man’s savage break forliberty.</p>
			<p>So completely did the blacks surround the two that they dared not fire for fearof hitting one of their own number, and Tarzan was already through them andupon the point of dodging into the concealing mazes of the jungle when one whohad sneaked upon him from behind struck him a heavy blow upon the head with arifle.</p>
			<p>In an instant the ape-man was down and a dozen black soldiers were upon hisback. When he regained consciousness he found himself securely bound, as wasWerper also. The Belgian officer, success having crowned his efforts, was ingood humor, and inclined to chaff his prisoners about the ease with which theyhad been captured; but from Tarzan of the Apes he elicited no response. Werper,however, was voluble in his protests. He explained that Tarzan was an Englishlord; but the officer only laughed at the assertion, and advised his prisonerto save his breath for his defense in court.</p>
			<p>As soon as Tarzan regained his senses and it was found that he was notseriously injured, the prisoners were hastened into line and the return marchtoward the Congo Free State boundary commenced.</p>
			<p>Toward evening the column halted beside a stream, made camp and prepared theevening meal. From the thick foliage of the nearby jungle a pair of fierce eyeswatched the activities of the uniformed blacks with silent intensity andcuriosity. From beneath beetling brows the creature saw the boma constructed,the fires built, and the supper prepared.</p>
			<p>Tarzan and Werper had been lying bound behind a small pile of knapsacks fromthe time that the company had halted; but with the preparation of the mealcompleted, their guard ordered them to rise and come forward to one of thefires where their hands would be unfettered that they might eat.</p>
			<p>As the giant ape-man rose, a startled expression of recognition entered theeyes of the watcher in the jungle, and a low guttural broke from the savagelips. Instantly Tarzan was alert, but the answering growl died upon his lips,suppressed by the fear that it might arouse the suspicions of the soldiers.</p>
			<p>Suddenly an inspiration came to him. He turned toward Werper.</p>
			<p>“I am going to speak to you in a loud voice and in a tongue which you donot understand. Appear to listen intently to what I say, and occasionallymumble something as though replying in the same language⁠—our escape mayhinge upon the success of your efforts.”</p>
			<p>Werper nodded in assent and understanding, and immediately there broke from thelips of his companion a strange jargon which might have been compared withequal propriety to the barking and growling of a dog and the chattering ofmonkeys.</p>
			<p>The nearer soldiers looked in surprise at the ape-man. Some of them laughed,while others drew away in evident superstitious fear. The officer approachedthe prisoners while Tarzan was still jabbering, and halted behind them,listening in perplexed interest. When Werper mumbled some ridiculous jargon inreply his curiosity broke bounds, and he stepped forward, demanding to knowwhat language it was that they spoke.</p>
			<p>Tarzan had gauged the measure of the man’s culture from the nature andquality of his conversation during the march, and he rested the success of hisreply upon the estimate he had made.</p>
			<p>“Greek,” he explained.</p>
			<p>“Oh, I thought it was Greek,” replied the officer; “but ithas been so many years since I studied it that I was not sure. In future,however, I will thank you to speak in a language which I am more familiarwith.”</p>
			<p>Werper turned his head to hide a grin, whispering to Tarzan: “It wasGreek to him all right⁠—and to me, too.”</p>
			<p>But one of the black soldiers mumbled in a low voice to a companion: “Ihave heard those sounds before⁠—once at night when I was lost in thejungle, I heard the hairy men of the trees talking among themselves, and theirwords were like the words of this white man. I wish that we had not found him.He is not a man at all⁠—he is a bad spirit, and we shall have bad luck ifwe do not let him go,” and the fellow rolled his eyes fearfully towardthe jungle.</p>
			<p>His companion laughed nervously, and moved away, to repeat the conversation,with variations and exaggerations, to others of the black soldiery, so that itwas not long before a frightful tale of black magic and sudden death was wovenabout the giant prisoner, and had gone the rounds of the camp.</p>
			<p>And deep in the gloomy jungle amidst the darkening shadows of the falling nighta hairy, manlike creature swung swiftly southward upon some secret mission ofhis own.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
