<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter xii: La Seeks Vengeance</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2><span epub:type="label">Chapter</span> <span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman"><em>xii</em></span></h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">La Seeks Vengeance</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Swinging back through the jungle in a wide circle the ape-man came to the riverat another point, drank and took to the trees again and while he hunted, alloblivious of his past and careless of his future, there came through the darkjungles and the open, parklike places and across the wide meadows, where grazedthe countless herbivora of the mysterious continent, a weird and terriblecaravan in search of him. There were fifty frightful men with hairy bodies andgnarled and crooked legs. They were armed with knives and great bludgeons andat their head marched an almost naked woman, beautiful beyond compare. It wasLa of Opar, High Priestess of the Flaming God, and fifty of her horrid priestssearching for the purloiner of the sacred sacrificial knife.</p>
			<p>Never before had La passed beyond the crumbling outer walls of Opar; but neverbefore had need been so insistent. The sacred knife was gone! Handed downthrough countless ages it had come to her as a heritage and an insignia of herreligious office and regal authority from some long-dead progenitor of lost andforgotten Atlantis. The loss of the crown jewels or the Great Seal of Englandcould have brought no greater consternation to a British king than did thepilfering of the sacred knife bring to La, the Oparian, Queen and HighPriestess of the degraded remnants of the oldest civilization upon earth. WhenAtlantis, with all her mighty cities and her cultivated fields and her greatcommerce and culture and riches sank into the sea long ages since, she tookwith her all but a handful of her colonists working the vast gold mines ofCentral Africa. From these and their degraded slaves and a later intermixtureof the blood of the anthropoids sprung the gnarled men of Opar; but by somequeer freak of fate, aided by natural selection, the old Atlantean strain hadremained pure and undegraded in the females descended from a single princess ofthe royal house of Atlantis who had been in Opar at the time of the greatcatastrophe. Such was La.</p>
			<p>Burning with white-hot anger was the High Priestess, her heart a seething,molten mass of hatred for Tarzan of the Apes. The zeal of the religious fanaticwhose altar has been desecrated was triply enhanced by the rage of a womanscorned. Twice had she thrown her heart at the feet of the godlike ape-man andtwice had she been repulsed. La knew that she was beautiful⁠—and she wasbeautiful, not by the standards of prehistoric Atlantis alone, but by those ofmodern times was La physically a creature of perfection. Before Tarzan camethat first time to Opar, La had never seen a human male other than thegrotesque and knotted men of her clan. With one of these she must mate sooneror later that the direct line of high priestesses might not be broken, unlessFate should bring other men to Opar. Before Tarzan came upon his first visit,La had had no thought that such men as he existed, for she knew only herhideous little priests and the bulls of the tribe of great anthropoids that haddwelt from time immemorial in and about Opar, until they had come to be lookedupon almost as equals by the Oparians. Among the legends of Opar were tales ofgodlike men of the olden time and of black men who had come more recently; butthese latter had been enemies who killed and robbed. And, too, these legendsalways held forth the hope that some day that nameless continent from whichtheir race had sprung, would rise once more out of the sea and with slaves atthe long sweeps would send her carven, gold-picked galleys forth to succor thelong-exiled colonists.</p>
			<p>The coming of Tarzan had aroused within La’s breast the wild hope that atlast the fulfillment of this ancient prophecy was at hand; but more stronglystill had it aroused the hot fires of love in a heart that never otherwisewould have known the meaning of that all-consuming passion, for such a wondrouscreature as La could never have felt love for any of the repulsive priests ofOpar. Custom, duty and religious zeal might have commanded the union; but therecould have been no love on La’s part. She had grown to young womanhood acold and heartless creature, daughter of a thousand other cold, heartless,beautiful women who had never known love. And so when love came to her itliberated all the pent passions of a thousand generations, transforming La intoa pulsing, throbbing volcano of desire, and with desire thwarted this greatforce of love and gentleness and sacrifice was transmuted by its own fires intoone of hatred and revenge.</p>
			<p>It was in a state of mind superinduced by these conditions that La led forthher jabbering company to retrieve the sacred emblem of her high office andwreak vengeance upon the author of her wrongs. To Werper she gave littlethought. The fact that the knife had been in his hand when it departed fromOpar brought down no thoughts of vengeance upon his head. Of course, he shouldbe slain when captured; but his death would give La no pleasure⁠—shelooked for that in the contemplated death agonies of Tarzan. He should betortured. His should be a slow and frightful death. His punishment should beadequate to the immensity of his crime. He had wrested the sacred knife fromLa; he had lain sacrilegious hands upon the High Priestess of the Flaming God;he had desecrated the altar and the temple. For these things he should die; buthe had scorned the love of La, the woman, and for this he should die horriblywith great anguish.</p>
			<p>The march of La and her priests was not without its adventures. Unused werethese to the ways of the jungle, since seldom did any venture forth from behindOpar’s crumbling walls, yet their very numbers protected them and so theycame without fatalities far along the trail of Tarzan and Werper. Three greatapes accompanied them and to these was delegated the business of tracking thequarry, a feat beyond the senses of the Oparians. La commanded. She arrangedthe order of march, she selected the camps, she set the hour for halting andthe hour for resuming and though she was inexperienced in such matters, hernative intelligence was so far above that of the men or the apes that she didbetter than they could have done. She was a hard taskmaster, too, for shelooked down with loathing and contempt upon the misshapen creatures amongstwhich cruel Fate had thrown her and to some extent vented upon them herdissatisfaction and her thwarted love. She made them build her a strongprotection and shelter each night and keep a great fire burning before it fromdusk to dawn. When she tired of walking they were forced to carry her upon animprovised litter, nor did one dare to question her authority or her right tosuch services. In fact they did not question either. To them she was a goddessand each loved her and each hoped that he would be chosen as her mate, so theyslaved for her and bore the stinging lash of her displeasure and the habituallyhaughty disdain of her manner without a murmur.</p>
			<p>For many days they marched, the apes following the trail easily and going alittle distance ahead of the body of the caravan that they might warn theothers of impending danger. It was during a noonday halt while all were lyingresting after a tiresome march that one of the apes rose suddenly and sniffedthe breeze. In a low guttural he cautioned the others to silence and a momentlater was swinging quietly up wind into the jungle. La and the priests gatheredsilently together, the hideous little men fingering their knives and bludgeons,and awaited the return of the shaggy anthropoid.</p>
			<p>Nor had they long to wait before they saw him emerge from a leafy thicket andapproach them. Straight to La he came and in the language of the great apeswhich was also the language of decadent Opar he addressed her.</p>
			<p>“The great Tarmangani lies asleep there,” he said, pointing in thedirection from which he had just come. “Come and we can kill him.”</p>
			<p>“Do not kill him,” commanded La in cold tones. “Bring thegreat Tarmangani to me alive and unhurt. The vengeance is La’s. Go; butmake no sound!” and she waved her hands to include all her followers.</p>
			<p>Cautiously the weird party crept through the jungle in the wake of the greatape until at last he halted them with a raised hand and pointed upward and alittle ahead. There they saw the giant form of the ape-man stretched along alow bough and even in sleep one hand grasped a stout limb and one strong, brownleg reached out and overlapped another. At ease lay Tarzan of the Apes,sleeping heavily upon a full stomach and dreaming of Numa, the lion, and Horta,the boar, and other creatures of the jungle. No intimation of danger assailedthe dormant faculties of the ape-man⁠—he saw no crouching hairy figuresupon the ground beneath him nor the three apes that swung quietly into the treebeside him.</p>
			<p>The first intimation of danger that came to Tarzan was the impact of threebodies as the three apes leaped upon him and hurled him to the ground, where healighted half stunned beneath their combined weight and was immediately setupon by the fifty hairy men or as many of them as could swarm upon his person.Instantly the ape-man became the center of a whirling, striking, bitingmaelstrom of horror. He fought nobly but the odds against him were too great.Slowly they overcame him though there was scarce one of them that did not feelthe weight of his mighty fist or the rending of his fangs.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
