<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter xiii: Condemned To Torture and Death</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2><span epub:type="label">Chapter</span> <span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman"><em>xiii</em></span></h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Condemned To Torture and Death</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>La had followed her company and when she saw them clawing and biting at Tarzan,she raised her voice and cautioned them not to kill him. She saw that he wasweakening and that soon the greater numbers would prevail over him, nor had shelong to wait before the mighty jungle creature lay helpless and bound at herfeet.</p>
			<p>“Bring him to the place at which we stopped,” she commanded andthey carried Tarzan back to the little clearing and threw him down beneath atree.</p>
			<p>“Build me a shelter!” ordered La. “We shall stop here tonightand tomorrow in the face of the Flaming God, La will offer up the heart of thisdefiler of the temple. Where is the sacred knife? Who took it from him?”</p>
			<p>But no one had seen it and each was positive in his assurance that thesacrificial weapon had not been upon Tarzan’s person when they capturedhim. The ape-man looked upon the menacing creatures which surrounded him andsnarled his defiance. He looked upon La and smiled. In the face of death he wasunafraid.</p>
			<p>“Where is the knife?” La asked him.</p>
			<p>“I do not know,” replied Tarzan. “The man took it with himwhen he slipped away during the night. Since you are so desirous for its returnI would look for him and get it back for you, did you not hold me prisoner; butnow that I am to die I cannot get it back. Of what good was your knife, anyway?You can make another. Did you follow us all this way for nothing more than aknife? Let me go and find him and I will bring it back to you.”</p>
			<p>La laughed a bitter laugh, for in her heart she knew that Tarzan’s sinwas greater than the purloining of the sacrificial knife of Opar; yet as shelooked at him lying bound and helpless before her, tears rose to her eyes sothat she had to turn away to hide them; but she remained inflexible in herdetermination to make him pay in frightful suffering and in eventual death fordaring to spurn the love of La.</p>
			<p>When the shelter was completed La had Tarzan transferred to it. “Allnight I shall torture him,” she muttered to her priests, “and atthe first streak of dawn you may prepare the flaming altar upon which his heartshall be offered up to the Flaming God. Gather wood well filled with pitch, layit in the form and size of the altar at Opar in the center of the clearing thatthe Flaming God may look down upon our handiwork and be pleased.”</p>
			<p>During the balance of the day the priests of Opar were busy erecting an altarin the center of the clearing, and while they worked they chanted weird hymnsin the ancient tongue of that lost continent that lies at the bottom of theAtlantic. They knew not the meanings of the words they mouthed; they butrepeated the ritual that had been handed down from preceptor to neophyte sincethat long-gone day when the ancestors of the Piltdown man still swung by theirtails in the humid jungles that are England now.</p>
			<p>And in the shelter of the hut, La paced to and fro beside the stoic ape-man.Resigned to his fate was Tarzan. No hope of succor gleamed through the deadblack of the death sentence hanging over him. He knew that his giant musclescould not part the many strands that bound his wrists and ankles, for he hadstrained often, but ineffectually for release. He had no hope of outside helpand only enemies surrounded him within the camp, and yet he smiled at La as shepaced nervously back and forth the length of the shelter.</p>
			<p>And La? She fingered her knife and looked down upon her captive. She glared andmuttered but she did not strike. “Tonight!” she thought.“Tonight, when it is dark I will torture him.” She looked upon hisperfect, godlike figure and upon his handsome, smiling face and then shesteeled her heart again by thoughts of her love spurned; by religious thoughtsthat damned the infidel who had desecrated the holy of holies; who had takenfrom the bloodstained altar of Opar the offering to the Flaming God⁠—andnot once but thrice. Three times had Tarzan cheated the god of her fathers. Atthe thought La paused and knelt at his side. In her hand was a sharp knife. Sheplaced its point against the ape-man’s side and pressed upon the hilt;but Tarzan only smiled and shrugged his shoulders.</p>
			<p>How beautiful he was! La bent low over him, looking into his eyes. How perfectwas his figure. She compared it with those of the knurled and knotted men fromwhom she must choose a mate, and La shuddered at the thought. Dusk came andafter dusk came night. A great fire blazed within the little thorn boma aboutthe camp. The flames played upon the new altar erected in the center of theclearing, arousing in the mind of the High Priestess of the Flaming God apicture of the event of the coming dawn. She saw this giant and perfect formwrithing amid the flames of the burning pyre. She saw those smiling lips,burned and blackened, falling away from the strong, white teeth. She saw theshock of black hair tousled upon Tarzan’s well-shaped head disappear in aspurt of flame. She saw these and many other frightful pictures as she stoodwith closed eyes and clenched fists above the object of her hate⁠—ah! wasit hate that La of Opar felt?</p>
			<p>The darkness of the jungle night had settled down upon the camp, relieved onlyby the fitful flarings of the fire that was kept up to warn off the man-eaters.Tarzan lay quietly in his bonds. He suffered from thirst and from the cuttingof the tight strands about his wrists and ankles; but he made no complaint. Ajungle beast was Tarzan with the stoicism of the beast and the intelligence ofman. He knew that his doom was sealed⁠—that no supplications would availto temper the severity of his end and so he wasted no breath in pleadings; butwaited patiently in the firm conviction that his sufferings could not endureforever.</p>
			<p>In the darkness La stooped above him. In her hand was a sharp knife and in hermind the determination to initiate his torture without further delay. The knifewas pressed against his side and La’s face was close to his when a suddenburst of flame from new branches thrown upon the fire without, lighted up theinterior of the shelter. Close beneath her lips La saw the perfect features ofthe forest god and into her woman’s heart welled all the great love shehad felt for Tarzan since first she had seen him, and all the accumulatedpassion of the years that she had dreamed of him.</p>
			<p>Dagger in hand, La, the High Priestess, towered above the helpless creaturethat had dared to violate the sanctuary of her deity. There should be notorture⁠—there should be instant death. No longer should the defiler ofthe temple pollute the sight of the lord god almighty. A single stroke of theheavy blade and then the corpse to the flaming pyre without. The knife armstiffened ready for the downward plunge, and then La, the woman, collapsedweakly upon the body of the man she loved.</p>
			<p>She ran her hands in mute caress over his naked flesh; she covered hisforehead, his eyes, his lips with hot kisses; she covered him with her body asthough to protect him from the hideous fate she had ordained for him, and intrembling, piteous tones she begged him for his love. For hours the frenzy ofher passion possessed the burning handmaiden of the Flaming God, until at lastsleep overpowered her and she lapsed into unconsciousness beside the man shehad sworn to torture and to slay. And Tarzan, untroubled by thoughts of thefuture, slept peacefully in La’s embrace.</p>
			<p>At the first hint of dawn the chanting of the priests of Opar brought Tarzan towakefulness. Initiated in low and subdued tones, the sound soon rose in volumeto the open diapason of barbaric blood lust. La stirred. Her perfect armpressed Tarzan closer to her⁠—a smile parted her lips and then she awoke,and slowly the smile faded and her eyes went wide in horror as the significanceof the death chant impinged upon her understanding.</p>
			<p>“Love me, Tarzan!” she cried. “Love me, and you shall besaved.”</p>
			<p>Tarzan’s bonds hurt him. He was suffering the tortures of long-restrictedcirculation. With an angry growl he rolled over with his back toward La. Thatwas her answer! The High Priestess leaped to her feet. A hot flush of shamemantled her cheek and then she went dead white and stepped to theshelter’s entrance.</p>
			<p>“Come, Priests of the Flaming God!” she cried, “and makeready the sacrifice.”</p>
			<p>The warped things advanced and entered the shelter. They laid hands upon Tarzanand bore him forth, and as they chanted they kept time with their crookedbodies, swaying to and fro to the rhythm of their song of blood and death.Behind them came La, swaying too; but not in unison with the chanted cadence.White and drawn was the face of the High Priestess⁠—white and drawn withunrequited love and hideous terror of the moments to come. Yet stern in herresolve was La. The infidel should die! The scorner of her love should pay theprice upon the fiery altar. She saw them lay the perfect body there upon therough branches. She saw the High Priest, he to whom custom would uniteher⁠—bent, crooked, gnarled, stunted, hideous⁠—advance with theflaming torch and stand awaiting her command to apply it to the faggotssurrounding the sacrificial pyre. His hairy, bestial face was distorted in ayellow-fanged grin of anticipatory enjoyment. His hands were cupped to receivethe life blood of the victim⁠—the red nectar that at Opar would havefilled the golden sacrificial goblets.</p>
			<p>La approached with upraised knife, her face turned toward the rising sun andupon her lips a prayer to the burning deity of her people. The High Priestlooked questioningly toward her⁠—the brand was burning close to his handand the faggots lay temptingly near. Tarzan closed his eyes and awaited theend. He knew that he would suffer, for he recalled the faint memories of pastburns. He knew that he would suffer and die; but he did not flinch. Death is nogreat adventure to the jungle bred who walk hand-in-hand with the grim specterby day and lie down at his side by night through all the years of their lives.It is doubtful that the ape-man even speculated upon what came after death. Asa matter of fact as his end approached, his mind was occupied by thoughts ofthe pretty pebbles he had lost, yet his every faculty still was open to whatpassed around him.</p>
			<p>He felt La lean over him and he opened his eyes. He saw her white, drawn faceand he saw tears blinding her eyes. “Tarzan, my Tarzan!” shemoaned, “tell me that you love me⁠—that you will return to Opar withme⁠—and you shall live. Even in the face of the anger of my people I willsave you. This last chance I give you. What is your answer?”</p>
			<p>At the last moment the woman in La had triumphed over the High Priestess of acruel cult. She saw upon the altar the only creature that ever had aroused thefires of love within her virgin breast; she saw the beast-faced fanatic whowould one day be her mate, unless she found another less repulsive, standingwith the burning torch ready to ignite the pyre; yet with all her mad passionfor the ape-man she would give the word to apply the flame if Tarzan’sfinal answer was unsatisfactory. With heaving bosom she leaned close above him.“Yes or no?” she whispered.</p>
			<p>Through the jungle, out of the distance, came faintly a sound that brought asudden light of hope to Tarzan’s eyes. He raised his voice in a weirdscream that sent La back from him a step or two. The impatient priest grumbledand switched the torch from one hand to the other at the same time holding itcloser to the tinder at the base of the pyre.</p>
			<p>“Your answer!” insisted La. “What is your answer to the loveof La of Opar?”</p>
			<p>Closer came the sound that had attracted Tarzan’s attention and now theothers heard it⁠—the shrill trumpeting of an elephant. As La lookedwide-eyed into Tarzan’s face, there to read her fate for happiness orheartbreak, she saw an expression of concern shadow his features. Now, for thefirst time, she guessed the meaning of Tarzan’s shrill scream⁠—hehad summoned Tantor, the elephant, to his rescue! La’s brows contractedin a savage scowl. “You refuse La!” she cried. “Then die! Thetorch!” she commanded, turning toward the priest.</p>
			<p>Tarzan looked up into her face. “Tantor is coming,” he said.“I thought that he would rescue me; but I know now from his voice that hewill slay me and you and all that fall in his path, searching out with thecunning of Sheeta, the panther, those who would hide from him, for Tantor ismad with the madness of love.”</p>
			<p>La knew only too well the insane ferocity of a bull elephant in <i>must</i>.She knew that Tarzan had not exaggerated. She knew that the devil in thecunning, cruel brain of the great beast might send it hither and thitherhunting through the forest for those who escaped its first charge, or the beastmight pass on without returning⁠—no one might guess which.</p>
			<p>“I cannot love you, La,” said Tarzan in a low voice. “I donot know why, for you are very beautiful. I could not go back and live inOpar⁠—I who have the whole broad jungle for my range. No, I cannot loveyou but I cannot see you die beneath the goring tusks of mad Tantor. Cut mybonds before it is too late. Already he is almost upon us. Cut them and I mayyet save you.”</p>
			<p>A little spiral of curling smoke rose from one corner of the pyre⁠—theflames licked upward, crackling. La stood there like a beautiful statue ofdespair gazing at Tarzan and at the spreading flames. In a moment they wouldreach out and grasp him. From the tangled forest came the sound of crackinglimbs and crashing trunks⁠—Tantor was coming down upon them, a hugeJuggernaut of the jungle. The priests were becoming uneasy. They castapprehensive glances in the direction of the approaching elephant and then backat La.</p>
			<p>“Fly!” she commanded them and then she stooped and cut the bondssecuring her prisoner’s feet and hands. In an instant Tarzan was upon theground. The priests screamed out their rage and disappointment. He with thetorch took a menacing step toward La and the ape-man. “Traitor!” Heshrieked at the woman. “For this you too shall die!” Raising hisbludgeon he rushed upon the High Priestess; but Tarzan was there before her.Leaping in to close quarters the ape-man seized the upraised weapon andwrenched it from the hands of the frenzied fanatic and then the priest closedupon him with tooth and nail. Seizing the stocky, stunted body in his mightyhands Tarzan raised the creature high above his head, hurling him at hisfellows who were now gathered ready to bear down upon their erstwhile captive.La stood proudly with ready knife behind the ape-man. No faint sign of fearmarked her perfect brow⁠—only haughty disdain for her priests andadmiration for the man she loved so hopelessly filled her thoughts.</p>
			<p>Suddenly upon this scene burst the mad bull⁠—a huge tusker, his littleeyes inflamed with insane rage. The priests stood for an instant paralyzed withterror; but Tarzan turned and gathering La in his arms raced for the nearesttree. Tantor bore down upon him trumpeting shrilly. La clung with both whitearms about the ape-man’s neck. She felt him leap into the air andmarveled at his strength and his ability as, burdened with her weight, he swungnimbly into the lower branches of a large tree and quickly bore her upwardbeyond reach of the sinuous trunk of the pachyderm.</p>
			<p>Momentarily baffled here, the huge elephant wheeled and bore down upon thehapless priests who had now scattered, terror-stricken, in every direction. Thenearest he gored and threw high among the branches of a tree. One he seized inthe coils of his trunk and broke upon a huge bole, dropping the mangled pulp tocharge, trumpeting, after another. Two he trampled beneath his huge feet and bythen the others had disappeared into the jungle. Now Tantor turned hisattention once more to Tarzan for one of the symptoms of madness is a revulsionof affection⁠—objects of sane love become the objects of insane hatred.Peculiar in the unwritten annals of the jungle was the proverbial love that hadexisted between the ape-man and the tribe of Tantor. No elephant in all thejungle would harm the Tarmangani⁠—the white-ape; but with the madness of<i>must</i> upon him the great bull sought to destroy his long-timeplay-fellow.</p>
			<p>Back to the tree where La and Tarzan perched came Tantor, the elephant. Hereared up with his forefeet against the bole and reached high toward them withhis long trunk; but Tarzan had foreseen this and clambered beyond thebull’s longest reach. Failure but tended to further enrage the madcreature. He bellowed and trumpeted and screamed until the earth shook to themighty volume of his noise. He put his head against the tree and pushed and thetree bent before his mighty strength; yet still it held.</p>
			<p>The actions of Tarzan were peculiar in the extreme. Had Numa, or Sabor, orSheeta, or any other beast of the jungle been seeking to destroy him, theape-man would have danced about hurling missiles and invectives at hisassailant. He would have insulted and taunted them, reviling in the jungleBillingsgate he knew so well; but now he sat silent out of Tantor’s reachand upon his handsome face was an expression of deep sorrow and pity, for ofall the jungle folk Tarzan loved Tantor the best. Could he have slain him hewould not have thought of doing so. His one idea was to escape, for he knewthat with the passing of the <i>must</i> Tantor would be sane again and thatonce more he might stretch at full length upon that mighty back and makefoolish speech into those great, flapping ears.</p>
			<p>Finding that the tree would not fall to his pushing, Tantor was but enraged themore. He looked up at the two perched high above him, his red-rimmed eyesblazing with insane hatred, and then he wound his trunk about the bole of thetree, spread his giant feet wide apart and tugged to uproot the jungle giant. Ahuge creature was Tantor, an enormous bull in the full prime of all hisstupendous strength. Mightily he strove until presently, to Tarzan’sconsternation, the great tree gave slowly at the roots. The ground rose inlittle mounds and ridges about the base of the bole, the tree tilted⁠—inanother moment it would be uprooted and fall.</p>
			<p>The ape-man whirled La to his back and just as the tree inclined slowly in itsfirst movement out of the perpendicular, before the sudden rush of its finalcollapse, he swung to the branches of a lesser neighbor. It was a long andperilous leap. La closed her eyes and shuddered; but when she opened them againshe found herself safe and Tarzan whirling onward through the forest. Behindthem the uprooted tree crashed heavily to the ground, carrying with it thelesser trees in its path and then Tantor, realizing that his prey had escapedhim, set up once more his hideous trumpeting and followed at a rapid chargeupon their trail.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
