<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title><em>xvii</em></title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-17" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2><span epub:type="label">Chapter</span> <span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman"><em>xvii</em></span></h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Deadly Peril of Jane Clayton</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Lieutenant Albert Werper, terrified by contemplation of the fate which mightawait him at Adis Abeba, cast about for some scheme of escape, but after theblack Mugambi had eluded their vigilance the Abyssinians redoubled theirprecautions to prevent Werper following the lead of the Negro.</p>
			<p>For some time Werper entertained the idea of bribing Abdul Mourak with aportion of the contents of the pouch; but fearing that the man would demand allthe gems as the price of liberty, the Belgian, influenced by avarice, soughtanother avenue from his dilemma.</p>
			<p>It was then that there dawned upon him the possibility of the success of adifferent course which would still leave him in possession of the jewels, whileat the same time satisfying the greed of the Abyssinian with the convictionthat he had obtained all that Werper had to offer.</p>
			<p>And so it was that a day or so after Mugambi had disappeared, Werper asked foran audience with Abdul Mourak. As the Belgian entered the presence of hiscaptor the scowl upon the features of the latter boded ill for any hope whichWerper might entertain, still he fortified himself by recalling the commonweakness of mankind, which permits the most inflexible of natures to bend tothe consuming desire for wealth.</p>
			<p>Abdul Mourak eyed him, frowningly. “What do you want now?” heasked.</p>
			<p>“My liberty,” replied Werper.</p>
			<p>The Abyssinian sneered. “And you disturbed me thus to tell me what anyfool might know,” he said.</p>
			<p>“I can pay for it,” said Werper.</p>
			<p>Abdul Mourak laughed loudly. “Pay for it?” he cried. “Whatwith⁠—the rags that you have upon your back? Or, perhaps you areconcealing beneath your coat a thousand pounds of ivory. Get out! You are afool. Do not bother me again or I shall have you whipped.”</p>
			<p>But Werper persisted. His liberty and perhaps his life depended upon hissuccess.</p>
			<p>“Listen to me,” he pleaded. “If I can give you as much goldas ten men may carry will you promise that I shall be conducted in safety tothe nearest English commissioner?”</p>
			<p>“As much gold as ten men may carry!” repeated Abdul Mourak.“You are crazy. Where have you so much gold as that?”</p>
			<p>“I know where it is hid,” said Werper. “Promise, and I willlead you to it⁠—if ten loads is enough?”</p>
			<p>Abdul Mourak had ceased to laugh. He was eyeing the Belgian intently. Thefellow seemed sane enough⁠—yet ten loads of gold! It was preposterous. TheAbyssinian thought in silence for a moment.</p>
			<p>“Well, and if I promise,” he said. “How far is thisgold?”</p>
			<p>“A long week’s march to the south,” replied Werper.</p>
			<p>“And if we do not find it where you say it is, do you realize what yourpunishment will be?”</p>
			<p>“If it is not there I will forfeit my life,” replied the Belgian.“I know it is there, for I saw it buried with my own eyes. Andmore⁠—there are not only ten loads, but as many as fifty men may carry. Itis all yours if you will promise to see me safely delivered into the protectionof the English.”</p>
			<p>“You will stake your life against the finding of the gold?” askedAbdul.</p>
			<p>Werper assented with a nod.</p>
			<p>“Very well,” said the Abyssinian, “I promise, and even ifthere be but five loads you shall have your freedom; but until the gold is inmy possession you remain a prisoner.”</p>
			<p>“I am satisfied,” said Werper. “Tomorrow we start?”</p>
			<p>Abdul Mourak nodded, and the Belgian returned to his guards. The following daythe Abyssinian soldiers were surprised to receive an order which turned theirfaces from the northeast to the south. And so it happened that upon the verynight that Tarzan and the two apes entered the village of the raiders, theAbyssinians camped but a few miles to the east of the same spot.</p>
			<p>While Werper dreamed of freedom and the unmolested enjoyment of the fortune inhis stolen pouch, and Abdul Mourak lay awake in greedy contemplation of thefifty loads of gold which lay but a few days farther to the south of him,Achmet Zek gave orders to his lieutenants that they should prepare a force offighting men and carriers to proceed to the ruins of the Englishman’s <em>douar</em> on the morrow and bring back the fabulous fortune which his renegadelieutenant had told him was buried there.</p>
			<p>And as he delivered his instructions to those within, a silent listenercrouched without his tent, waiting for the time when he might enter in safetyand prosecute his search for the missing pouch and the pretty pebbles that hadcaught his fancy.</p>
			<p>At last the swarthy companions of Achmet Zek quitted his tent, and the leaderwent with them to smoke a pipe with one of their number, leaving his own silkenhabitation unguarded. Scarcely had they left the interior when a knife bladewas thrust through the fabric of the rear wall, some six feet above the ground,and a swift downward stroke opened an entrance to those who waited beyond.</p>
			<p>Through the opening stepped the ape-man, and close behind him came the hugeChulk; but Taglat did not follow them. Instead he turned and slunk through thedarkness toward the hut where the she who had arrested his brutish interest laysecurely bound. Before the doorway the sentries sat upon their haunches,conversing in monotones. Within, the young woman lay upon a filthy sleepingmat, resigned, through utter hopelessness to whatever fate lay in store for heruntil the opportunity arrived which would permit her to free herself by theonly means which now seemed even remotely possible⁠—the hitherto detestedact of self-destruction.</p>
			<p>Creeping silently toward the sentries, a white-burnoosed figure approached theshadows at one end of the hut. The meager intellect of the creature denied itthe advantage it might have taken of its disguise. Where it could have walkedboldly to the very sides of the sentries, it chose rather to sneak upon them,unseen, from the rear.</p>
			<p>It came to the corner of the hut and peered around. The sentries were but a fewpaces away; but the ape did not dare expose himself, even for an instant, tothose feared and hated thunder-sticks which the Tarmangani knew so well how touse, if there were another and safer method of attack.</p>
			<p>Taglat wished that there was a tree nearby from the over-hanging branches ofwhich he might spring upon his unsuspecting prey; but, though there was notree, the idea gave birth to a plan. The eaves of the hut were just above theheads of the sentries⁠—from them he could leap upon the Tarmangani,unseen. A quick snap of those mighty jaws would dispose of one of them beforethe other realized that they were attacked, and the second would fall an easyprey to the strength, agility and ferocity of a second quick charge.</p>
			<p>Taglat withdrew a few paces to the rear of the hut, gathered himself for theeffort, ran quickly forward and leaped high into the air. He struck the roofdirectly above the rear wall of the hut, and the structure, reinforced by thewall beneath, held his enormous weight for an instant, then he moved forward astep, the roof sagged, the thatching parted and the great anthropoid shotthrough into the interior.</p>
			<p>The sentries, hearing the crashing of the roof poles, leaped to their feet andrushed into the hut. Jane Clayton tried to roll aside as the great form litupon the floor so close to her that one foot pinned her clothing to the ground.</p>
			<p>The ape, feeling the movement beside him, reached down and gathered the girl inthe hollow of one mighty arm. The burnoose covered the hairy body so that JaneClayton believed that a human arm supported her, and from the extremity ofhopelessness a great hope sprang into her breast that at last she was in thekeeping of a rescuer.</p>
			<p>The two sentries were now within the hut, but hesitating because of doubt as tothe nature of the cause of the disturbance. Their eyes, not yet accustomed tothe darkness of the interior, told them nothing, nor did they hear any sound,for the ape stood silently awaiting their attack.</p>
			<p>Seeing that they stood without advancing, and realizing that, handicapped as hewas by the weight of the she, he could put up but a poor battle, Taglat electedto risk a sudden break for liberty. Lowering his head, he charged straight forthe two sentries who blocked the doorway. The impact of his mighty shouldersbowled them over upon their backs, and before they could scramble to theirfeet, the ape was gone, darting in the shadows of the huts toward the palisadeat the far end of the village.</p>
			<p>The speed and strength of her rescuer filled Jane Clayton with wonder. Could itbe that Tarzan had survived the bullet of the Arab? Who else in all the junglecould bear the weight of a grown woman as lightly as he who held her? She spokehis name; but there was no response. Still she did not give up hope.</p>
			<p>At the palisade the beast did not even hesitate. A single mighty leap carriedit to the top, where it poised but for an instant before dropping to the groundupon the opposite side. Now the girl was almost positive that she was safe inthe arms of her husband, and when the ape took to the trees and bore herswiftly into the jungle, as Tarzan had done at other times in the past, beliefbecame conviction.</p>
			<p>In a little moonlit glade, a mile or so from the camp of the raiders, herrescuer halted and dropped her to the ground. His roughness surprised her, butstill she had no doubts. Again she called him by name, and at the same instantthe ape, fretting under the restraints of the unaccustomed garments of theTarmangani, tore the burnoose from him, revealing to the eyes of thehorror-struck woman the hideous face and hairy form of a giant anthropoid.</p>
			<p>With a piteous wail of terror, Jane Clayton swooned, while, from theconcealment of a nearby bush, Numa, the lion, eyed the pair hungrily and lickedhis chops.</p>
			<p class="p2">Tarzan, entering the tent of Achmet Zek, searched the interior thoroughly. Hetore the bed to pieces and scattered the contents of box and bag about thefloor. He investigated whatever his eyes discovered, nor did those keen organsoverlook a single article within the habitation of the raider chief; but nopouch or pretty pebbles rewarded his thoroughness.</p>
			<p>Satisfied at last that his belongings were not in the possession of Achmet Zek,unless they were on the person of the chief himself, Tarzan decided to securethe person of the she before further prosecuting his search for the pouch.</p>
			<p>Motioning for Chulk to follow him, he passed out of the tent by the same waythat he had entered it, and walking boldly through the village, made directlyfor the hut where Jane Clayton had been imprisoned.</p>
			<p>He noted with surprise the absence of Taglat, whom he had expected to findawaiting him outside the tent of Achmet Zek; but, accustomed as he was to theunreliability of apes, he gave no serious attention to the present defection ofhis surly companion. So long as Taglat did not cause interference with hisplans, Tarzan was indifferent to his absence.</p>
			<p>As he approached the hut, the ape-man noticed that a crowd had collected aboutthe entrance. He could see that the men who composed it were much excited, andfearing lest Chulk’s disguise should prove inadequate to the concealmentof his true identity in the face of so many observers, he commanded the ape tobetake himself to the far end of the village, and there await him.</p>
			<p>As Chulk waddled off, keeping to the shadows, Tarzan advanced boldly toward theexcited group before the doorway of the hut. He mingled with the blacks and theArabs in an endeavor to learn the cause of the commotion, in his interestforgetting that he alone of the assemblage carried a spear, a bow and arrows,and thus might become an object of suspicious attention.</p>
			<p>Shouldering his way through the crowd he approached the doorway, and had almostreached it when one of the Arabs laid a hand upon his shoulder, crying:“Who is this?” at the same time snatching back the hood from theape-man’s face.</p>
			<p>Tarzan of the Apes in all his savage life had never been accustomed to pause inargument with an antagonist. The primitive instinct of self-preservationacknowledges many arts and wiles; but argument is not one of them, nor did henow waste precious time in an attempt to convince the raiders that he was not awolf in sheep’s clothing. Instead he had his unmasker by the throat erethe man’s words had scarce quitted his lips, and hurling him from side toside brushed away those who would have swarmed upon him.</p>
			<p>Using the Arab as a weapon, Tarzan forced his way quickly to the doorway, and amoment later was within the hut. A hasty examination revealed the fact that itwas empty, and his sense of smell discovered, too, the scent spoor of Taglat,the ape. Tarzan uttered a low, ominous growl. Those who were pressing forwardat the doorway to seize him, fell back as the savage notes of the bestialchallenge smote upon their ears. They looked at one another in surprise andconsternation. A man had entered the hut alone, and yet with their own earsthey had heard the voice of a wild beast within. What could it mean? Had a lionor a leopard sought sanctuary in the interior, unbeknown to the sentries?</p>
			<p>Tarzan’s quick eyes discovered the opening in the roof, through whichTaglat had fallen. He guessed that the ape had either come or gone by way ofthe break, and while the Arabs hesitated without, he sprang, catlike, for theopening, grasped the top of the wall and clambered out upon the roof, droppinginstantly to the ground at the rear of the hut.</p>
			<p>When the Arabs finally mustered courage to enter the hut, after firing severalvolleys through the walls, they found the interior deserted. At the same timeTarzan, at the far end of the village, sought for Chulk; but the ape wasnowhere to be found.</p>
			<p>Robbed of his she, deserted by his companions, and as much in ignorance as everas to the whereabouts of his pouch and pebbles, it was an angry Tarzan whoclimbed the palisade and vanished into the darkness of the jungle.</p>
			<p>For the present he must give up the search for his pouch, since it would beparamount to self-destruction to enter the Arab camp now while all itsinhabitants were aroused and upon the alert.</p>
			<p>In his escape from the village, the ape-man had lost the spoor of the fleeingTaglat, and now he circled widely through the forest in an endeavor to againpick it up.</p>
			<p>Chulk had remained at his post until the cries and shots of the Arabs hadfilled his simple soul with terror, for above all things the ape folk fear thethunder-sticks of the Tarmangani; then he had clambered nimbly over thepalisade, tearing his burnoose in the effort, and fled into the depths of thejungle, grumbling and scolding as he went.</p>
			<p>Tarzan, roaming the jungle in search of the trail of Taglat and the she,traveled swiftly. In a little moonlit glade ahead of him the great ape wasbending over the prostrate form of the woman Tarzan sought. The beast wastearing at the bonds that confined her ankles and wrists, pulling and gnawingupon the cords.</p>
			<p>The course the ape-man was taking would carry him but a short distance to theright of them, and though he could not have seen them the wind was bearing downfrom them to him, carrying their scent spoor strongly toward him.</p>
			<p>A moment more and Jane Clayton’s safety might have been assured, eventhough Numa, the lion, was already gathering himself in preparation for acharge; but Fate, already all too cruel, now outdid herself⁠—the windveered suddenly for a few moments, the scent spoor that would have led theape-man to the girl’s side was wafted in the opposite direction; Tarzanpassed within fifty yards of the tragedy that was being enacted in the glade,and the opportunity was gone beyond recall.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
