<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2><span epub:type="label">Chapter</span> <span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</span></h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Flight to the Jungle</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Sleepless upon his blankets, Albert Werper let his evil mind dwell upon thecharms of the woman in the nearby tent. He had noted Mohammed Beyd’ssudden interest in the girl, and judging the man by his own standards, hadguessed at the basis of the Arab’s sudden change of attitude toward theprisoner.</p>
			<p>And as he let his imaginings run riot they aroused within him a bestialjealousy of Mohammed Beyd, and a great fear that the other might encompass hisbase designs upon the defenseless girl. By a strange process of reasoning,Werper, whose designs were identical with the Arab’s, pictured himself asJane Clayton’s protector, and presently convinced himself that theattentions which might seem hideous to her if proffered by Mohammed Beyd, wouldbe welcomed from Albert Werper.</p>
			<p>Her husband was dead, and Werper fancied that he could replace in thegirl’s heart the position which had been vacated by the act of the grimreaper. He could offer Jane Clayton marriage⁠—a thing which Mohammed Beydwould not offer, and which the girl would spurn from him with as deep disgustas she would his unholy lust.</p>
			<p>It was not long before the Belgian had succeeded in convincing himself that thecaptive not only had every reason for having conceived sentiments of love forhim; but that she had by various feminine methods acknowledged her new-bornaffection.</p>
			<p>And then a sudden resolution possessed him. He threw the blankets from him androse to his feet. Pulling on his boots and buckling his cartridge belt andrevolver about his hips he stepped to the flap of his tent and looked out.There was no sentry before the entrance to the prisoner’s tent! Whatcould it mean? Fate was indeed playing into his hands.</p>
			<p>Stepping outside he passed to the rear of the girl’s tent. There was nosentry there, either! And now, boldly, he walked to the entrance and steppedwithin.</p>
			<p>Dimly the moonlight illumined the interior. Across the tent a figure bent abovethe blankets of a bed. There was a whispered word, and another figure rose fromthe blankets to a sitting position. Slowly Albert Werper’s eyes werebecoming accustomed to the half darkness of the tent. He saw that the figureleaning over the bed was that of a man, and he guessed at the truth of thenocturnal visitor’s identity.</p>
			<p>A sullen, jealous rage enveloped him. He took a step in the direction of thetwo. He heard a frightened cry break from the girl’s lips as sherecognized the features of the man above her, and he saw Mohammed Beyd seizeher by the throat and bear her back upon the blankets.</p>
			<p>Cheated passion cast a red blur before the eyes of the Belgian. No! The manshould not have her. She was for him and him alone. He would not be robbed ofhis rights.</p>
			<p>Quickly he ran across the tent and threw himself upon the back of MohammedBeyd. The latter, though surprised by this sudden and unexpected attack, wasnot one to give up without a battle. The Belgian’s fingers were feelingfor his throat, but the Arab tore them away, and rising wheeled upon hisadversary. As they faced each other Werper struck the Arab a heavy blow in theface, sending him staggering backward. If he had followed up his advantage hewould have had Mohammed Beyd at his mercy in another moment; but instead hetugged at his revolver to draw it from its holster, and Fate ordained that atthat particular moment the weapon should stick in its leather scabbard.</p>
			<p>Before he could disengage it, Mohammed Beyd had recovered himself and wasdashing upon him. Again Werper struck the other in the face, and the Arabreturned the blow. Striking at each other and ceaselessly attempting to clinch,the two battled about the small interior of the tent, while the girl, wide-eyedin terror and astonishment, watched the duel in frozen silence.</p>
			<p>Again and again Werper struggled to draw his weapon. Mohammed Beyd,anticipating no such opposition to his base desires, had come to the tentunarmed, except for a long knife which he now drew as he stood panting duringthe first brief rest of the encounter.</p>
			<p>“Dog of a Christian,” he whispered, “look upon this knife inthe hands of Mohammed Beyd! Look well, unbeliever, for it is the last thing inlife that you shall see or feel. With it Mohammed Beyd will cut out your blackheart. If you have a God pray to him now⁠—in a minute more you shall bedead,” and with that he rushed viciously upon the Belgian, his kniferaised high above his head.</p>
			<p>Werper was still dragging futilely at his weapon. The Arab was almost upon him.In desperation the European waited until Mohammed Beyd was all but against him,then he threw himself to one side to the floor of the tent, leaving a legextended in the path of the Arab.</p>
			<p>The trick succeeded. Mohammed Beyd, carried on by the momentum of his charge,stumbled over the projecting obstacle and crashed to the ground. Instantly hewas up again and wheeling to renew the battle; but Werper was on foot ahead ofhim, and now his revolver, loosened from its holster, flashed in his hand.</p>
			<p>The Arab dove headfirst to grapple with him, there was a sharp report, a luridgleam of flame in the darkness, and Mohammed Beyd rolled over and over upon thefloor to come to a final rest beside the bed of the woman he had sought todishonor.</p>
			<p>Almost immediately following the report came the sound of excited voices in thecamp without. Men were calling back and forth to one another asking the meaningof the shot. Werper could hear them running hither and thither, investigating.</p>
			<p>Jane Clayton had risen to her feet as the Arab died, and now she came forwardwith outstretched hands toward Werper.</p>
			<p>“How can I ever thank you, my friend?” she asked. “And tothink that only today I had almost believed the infamous story which this beasttold me of your perfidy and of your past. Forgive me, M. Frecoult. I might haveknown that a white man and a gentleman could be naught else than the protectorof a woman of his own race amid the dangers of this savage land.”</p>
			<p>Werper’s hands dropped limply at his sides. He stood looking at the girl;but he could find no words to reply to her. Her innocent arraignment of histrue purposes was unanswerable.</p>
			<p>Outside, the Arabs were searching for the author of the disturbing shot. Thetwo sentries who had been relieved and sent to their blankets by Mohammed Beydwere the first to suggest going to the tent of the prisoner. It occurred tothem that possibly the woman had successfully defended herself against theirleader.</p>
			<p>Werper heard the men approaching. To be apprehended as the slayer of MohammedBeyd would be equivalent to a sentence of immediate death. The fierce andbrutal raiders would tear to pieces a Christian who had dared spill the bloodof their leader. He must find some excuse to delay the finding of MohammedBeyd’s dead body.</p>
			<p>Returning his revolver to its holster, he walked quickly to the entrance of thetent. Parting the flaps he stepped out and confronted the men, who were rapidlyapproaching. Somehow he found within him the necessary bravado to force a smileto his lips, as he held up his hand to bar their farther progress.</p>
			<p>“The woman resisted,” he said, “and Mohammed Beyd was forcedto shoot her. She is not dead⁠—only slightly wounded. You may go back toyour blankets. Mohammed Beyd and I will look after the prisoner;” then heturned and re-entered the tent, and the raiders, satisfied by this explanation,gladly returned to their broken slumbers.</p>
			<p>As he again faced Jane Clayton, Werper found himself animated by quitedifferent intentions than those which had lured him from his blankets but a fewminutes before. The excitement of his encounter with Mohammed Beyd, as well asthe dangers which he now faced at the hands of the raiders when morning mustinevitably reveal the truth of what had occurred in the tent of the prisonerthat night, had naturally cooled the hot passion which had dominated him whenhe entered the tent.</p>
			<p>But another and stronger force was exerting itself in the girl’s favor.However low a man may sink, honor and chivalry, has he ever possessed them, arenever entirely eradicated from his character, and though Albert Werper had longsince ceased to evidence the slightest claim to either the one or the other,the spontaneous acknowledgment of them which the girl’s speech hadpresumed had reawakened them both within him.</p>
			<p>For the first time he realized the almost hopeless and frightful position ofthe fair captive, and the depths of ignominy to which he had sunk, that hadmade it possible for him, a well-born, European gentleman, to have entertainedeven for a moment the part that he had taken in the ruin of her home,happiness, and herself.</p>
			<p>Too much of baseness already lay at the threshold of his conscience for himever to hope entirely to redeem himself; but in the first, sudden burst ofcontrition the man conceived an honest intention to undo, in so far as laywithin his power, the evil that his criminal avarice had brought upon thissweet and unoffending woman.</p>
			<p>As he stood apparently listening to the retreating footsteps⁠—Jane Claytonapproached him.</p>
			<p>“What are we to do now?” she asked. “Morning will bringdiscovery of this,” and she pointed to the still body of Mohammed Beyd.“They will kill you when they find him.”</p>
			<p>For a time Werper did not reply, then he turned suddenly toward the woman.</p>
			<p>“I have a plan,” he cried. “It will require nerve and courageon your part; but you have already shown that you possess both. Can you endurestill more?”</p>
			<p>“I can endure anything,” she replied with a brave smile,“that may offer us even a slight chance for escape.”</p>
			<p>“You must simulate death,” he explained, “while I carry youfrom the camp. I will explain to the sentries that Mohammed Beyd has ordered meto take your body into the jungle. This seemingly unnecessary act I shallexplain upon the grounds that Mohammed Beyd had conceived a violent passion foryou and that he so regretted the act by which he had become your slayer that hecould not endure the silent reproach of your lifeless body.”</p>
			<p>The girl held up her hand to stop. A smile touched her lips.</p>
			<p>“Are you quite mad?” she asked. “Do you imagine that thesentries will credit any such ridiculous tale?”</p>
			<p>“You do not know them,” he replied. “Beneath their roughexteriors, despite their calloused and criminal natures, there exists in each awell-defined strain of romantic emotionalism⁠—you will find it among suchas these throughout the world. It is romance which lures men to lead wild livesof outlawry and crime. The ruse will succeed⁠—never fear.”</p>
			<p>Jane Clayton shrugged. “We can but try it⁠—and then what?”</p>
			<p>“I shall hide you in the jungle,” continued the Belgian,“coming for you alone and with two horses in the morning.”</p>
			<p>“But how will you explain Mohammed Beyd’s death?” she asked.“It will be discovered before ever you can escape the camp in themorning.”</p>
			<p>“I shall not explain it,” replied Werper. “Mohammed Beydshall explain it himself⁠—we must leave that to him. Are you ready for theventure?”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“But wait, I must get you a weapon and ammunition,” and Werperwalked quickly from the tent.</p>
			<p>Very shortly he returned with an extra revolver and ammunition belt strappedabout his waist.</p>
			<p>“Are you ready?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“Quite ready,” replied the girl.</p>
			<p>“Then come and throw yourself limply across my left shoulder,” andWerper knelt to receive her.</p>
			<p>“There,” he said, as he rose to his feet. “Now, let yourarms, your legs and your head hang limply. Remember that you are dead.”</p>
			<p>A moment later the man walked out into the camp, the body of the woman acrosshis shoulder.</p>
			<p>A thorn boma had been thrown up about the camp, to discourage the bolder of thehungry carnivora. A couple of sentries paced to and fro in the light of a firewhich they kept burning brightly. The nearer of these looked up in surprise ashe saw Werper approaching.</p>
			<p>“Who are you?” he cried. “What have you there?”</p>
			<p>Werper raised the hood of his burnoose that the fellow might see his face.</p>
			<p>“This is the body of the woman,” he explained. “Mohammed Beydhas asked me to take it into the jungle, for he cannot bear to look upon theface of her whom he loved, and whom necessity compelled him to slay. He suffersgreatly⁠—he is inconsolable. It was with difficulty that I prevented himtaking his own life.”</p>
			<p>Across the speaker’s shoulder, limp and frightened, the girl waited forthe Arab’s reply. He would laugh at this preposterous story; of that shewas sure. In an instant he would unmask the deception that M. Frecoult wasattempting to practice upon him, and they would both be lost. She tried to planhow best she might aid her would-be rescuer in the fight which must mostcertainly follow within a moment or two.</p>
			<p>Then she heard the voice of the Arab as he replied to M. Frecoult.</p>
			<p>“Are you going alone, or do you wish me to awaken someone to accompanyyou?” he asked, and his tone denoted not the least surprise that MohammedBeyd had suddenly discovered such remarkably sensitive characteristics.</p>
			<p>“I shall go alone,” replied Werper, and he passed on and outthrough the narrow opening in the boma, by which the sentry stood.</p>
			<p>A moment later he had entered among the boles of the trees with his burden, andwhen safely hidden from the sentry’s view lowered the girl to her feet,with a low, “sh-sh,” when she would have spoken.</p>
			<p>Then he led her a little farther into the forest, halted beneath a large treewith spreading branches, buckled a cartridge belt and revolver about her waist,and assisted her to clamber into the lower branches.</p>
			<p>“Tomorrow,” he whispered, “as soon as I can elude them, Iwill return for you. Be brave, Lady Greystoke⁠—we may yet escape.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you,” she replied in a low tone. “You have been verykind, and very brave.”</p>
			<p>Werper did not reply, and the darkness of the night hid the scarlet flush ofshame which swept upward across his face. Quickly he turned and made his wayback to camp. The sentry, from his post, saw him enter his own tent; but he didnot see him crawl under the canvas at the rear and sneak cautiously to the tentwhich the prisoner had occupied, where now lay the dead body of Mohammed Beyd.</p>
			<p>Raising the lower edge of the rear wall, Werper crept within and approached thecorpse. Without an instant’s hesitation he seized the dead wrists anddragged the body upon its back to the point where he had just entered. On handsand knees he backed out as he had come in, drawing the corpse after him. Onceoutside the Belgian crept to the side of the tent and surveyed as much of thecamp as lay within his vision⁠—no one was watching.</p>
			<p>Returning to the body, he lifted it to his shoulder, and risking all on a quicksally, ran swiftly across the narrow opening which separated theprisoner’s tent from that of the dead man. Behind the silken wall hehalted and lowered his burden to the ground, and there he remained motionlessfor several minutes, listening.</p>
			<p>Satisfied, at last, that no one had seen him, he stooped and raised the bottomof the tent wall, backed in and dragged the thing that had been Mohammed Beydafter him. To the sleeping rugs of the dead raider he drew the corpse, then hefumbled about in the darkness until he had found Mohammed Beyd’srevolver. With the weapon in his hand he returned to the side of the dead man,kneeled beside the bedding, and inserted his right hand with the weapon beneaththe rugs, piled a number of thicknesses of the closely woven fabric over andabout the revolver with his left hand. Then he pulled the trigger, and at thesame time he coughed.</p>
			<p>The muffled report could not have been heard above the sound of his cough byone directly outside the tent. Werper was satisfied. A grim smile touched hislips as he withdrew the weapon from the rugs and placed it carefully in theright hand of the dead man, fixing three of the fingers around the grip and theindex finger inside the trigger guard.</p>
			<p>A moment longer he tarried to rearrange the disordered rugs, and then he leftas he had entered, fastening down the rear wall of the tent as it had beenbefore he had raised it.</p>
			<p>Going to the tent of the prisoner he removed there also the evidence thatsomeone might have come or gone beneath the rear wall. Then he returned to hisown tent, entered, fastened down the canvas, and crawled into his blankets.</p>
			<p>The following morning he was awakened by the excited voice of MohammedBeyd’s slave calling to him at the entrance of his tent.</p>
			<p>“Quick! Quick!” cried the black in a frightened tone. “Come!Mohammed Beyd is dead in his tent⁠—dead by his own hand.”</p>
			<p>Werper sat up quickly in his blankets at the first alarm, a startled expressionupon his countenance; but at the last words of the black a sigh of reliefescaped his lips and a slight smile replaced the tense lines upon his face.</p>
			<p>“I come,” he called to the slave, and drawing on his boots, roseand went out of his tent.</p>
			<p>Excited Arabs and blacks were running from all parts of the camp toward thesilken tent of Mohammed Beyd, and when Werper entered he found a number of theraiders crowded about the corpse, now cold and stiff.</p>
			<p>Shouldering his way among them, the Belgian halted beside the dead body of theraider. He looked down in silence for a moment upon the still face, then hewheeled upon the Arabs.</p>
			<p>“Who has done this thing?” he cried. His tone was both menacing andaccusing. “Who has murdered Mohammed Beyd?”</p>
			<p>A sudden chorus of voices arose in tumultuous protest.</p>
			<p>“Mohammed Beyd was not murdered,” they cried. “He died by hisown hand. This, and Allah, are our witnesses,” and they pointed to arevolver in the dead man’s hand.</p>
			<p>For a time Werper pretended to be skeptical; but at last permitted himself tobe convinced that Mohammed Beyd had indeed killed himself in remorse for thedeath of the white woman he had, all unknown to his followers, loved sodevotedly.</p>
			<p>Werper himself wrapped the blankets of the dead man about the corpse, takingcare to fold inward the scorched and bullet-torn fabric that had muffled thereport of the weapon he had fired the night before. Then six husky blackscarried the body out into the clearing where the camp stood, and deposited itin a shallow grave. As the loose earth fell upon the silent form beneath thetell-tale blankets, Albert Werper heaved another sigh of relief⁠—his planhad worked out even better than he had dared hope.</p>
			<p>With Achmet Zek and Mohammed Beyd both dead, the raiders were without a leader,and after a brief conference they decided to return into the north on visits tothe various tribes to which they belonged. Werper, after learning the directionthey intended taking, announced that for his part, he was going east to thecoast, and as they knew of nothing he possessed which any of them coveted, theysignified their willingness that he should go his way.</p>
			<p>As they rode off, he sat his horse in the center of the clearing watching themdisappear one by one into the jungle, and thanked his God that he had at lastescaped their villainous clutches.</p>
			<p>When he could no longer hear any sound of them, he turned to the right and rodeinto the forest toward the tree where he had hidden Lady Greystoke, and drawingrein beneath it, called up in a gay and hopeful voice a pleasant, “Goodmorning!”</p>
			<p>There was no reply, and though his eyes searched the thick foliage above him,he could see no sign of the girl. Dismounting, he quickly climbed into thetree, where he could obtain a view of all its branches. The tree wasempty⁠—Jane Clayton had vanished during the silent watches of the junglenight.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
