<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>CHAPTER X.Achmet Zek Sees the Jewels</h2>
			<p>Mugambi, weak and suffering, had dragged his painful way along the trail of theretreating raiders. He could move but slowly, resting often; but savage hatredand an equally savage desire for vengeance kept him to his task. As the dayspassed his wounds healed and his strength returned, until at last his giantframe had regained all of its former mighty powers. Now he went more rapidly;but the mounted Arabs had covered a great distance while the wounded black hadbeen painfully crawling after them.</p>
			<p>They had reached their fortified camp, and there Achmet Zek awaited the returnof his lieutenant, Albert Werper. During the long, rough journey, Jane Claytonhad suffered more in anticipation of her impending fate than from the hardshipsof the road.</p>
			<p>Achmet Zek had not deigned to acquaint her with his intentions regarding herfuture. She prayed that she had been captured in the hope of ransom, for ifsuch should prove the case, no great harm would befall her at the hands of theArabs; but there was the chance, the horrid chance, that another fate awaitedher. She had heard of many women, among whom were white women, who had beensold by outlaws such as Achmet Zek into the slavery of black harems, or takenfarther north into the almost equally hideous existence of some Turkishseraglio.</p>
			<p>Jane Clayton was of sterner stuff than that which bends in spineless terrorbefore danger. Until hope proved futile she would not give it up; nor did sheentertain thoughts of self-destruction only as a final escape from dishonor. Solong as Tarzan lived there was every reason to expect succor. No man nor beastwho roamed the savage continent could boast the cunning and the powers of herlord and master. To her, he was little short of omnipotent in his nativeworld⁠—this world of savage beasts and savage men. Tarzan would come, andshe would be rescued and avenged, of that she was certain. She counted the daysthat must elapse before he would return from Opar and discover what hadtranspired during his absence. After that it would be but a short time beforehe had surrounded the Arab stronghold and punished the motley crew ofwrongdoers who inhabited it.</p>
			<p>That he could find her she had no slightest doubt. No spoor, however faint,could elude the keen vigilance of his senses. To him, the trail of the raiderswould be as plain as the printed page of an open book to her.</p>
			<p>And while she hoped, there came through the dark jungle another. Terrified bynight and by day, came Albert Werper. A dozen times he had escaped the clawsand fangs of the giant carnivora only by what seemed a miracle to him. Armedwith nothing more than the knife he had brought with him from Opar, he had madehis way through as savage a country as yet exists upon the face of the globe.</p>
			<p>By night he had slept in trees. By day he had stumbled fearfully on, oftentaking refuge among the branches when sight or sound of some great cat warnedhim from danger. But at last he had come within sight of the palisade behindwhich were his fierce companions.</p>
			<p>At almost the same time Mugambi came out of the jungle before the walledvillage. As he stood in the shadow of a great tree, reconnoitering, he saw aman, ragged and disheveled, emerge from the jungle almost at his elbow.Instantly he recognized the newcomer as he who had been a guest of his masterbefore the latter had departed for Opar.</p>
			<p>The black was upon the point of hailing the Belgian when something stayed him.He saw the white man walking confidently across the clearing toward the villagegate. No sane man thus approached a village in this part of Africa unless hewas sure of a friendly welcome. Mugambi waited. His suspicions were aroused.</p>
			<p>He heard Werper halloo; he saw the gates swing open, and he witnessed thesurprised and friendly welcome that was accorded the erstwhile guest of Lordand Lady Greystoke. A light broke upon the understanding of Mugambi. This whiteman had been a traitor and a spy. It was to him they owed the raid during theabsence of the Great Bwana. To his hate for the Arabs, Mugambi added a stillgreater hate for the white spy.</p>
			<p>Within the village Werper passed hurriedly toward the silken tent of AchmetZek. The Arab arose as his lieutenant entered. His face showed surprise as heviewed the tattered apparel of the Belgian.</p>
			<p>“What has happened?” he asked.</p>
			<p>Werper narrated all, save the little matter of the pouch of gems which were nowtightly strapped about his waist, beneath his clothing. The Arab’s eyesnarrowed greedily as his henchman described the treasure that the Waziri hadburied beside the ruins of the Greystoke bungalow.</p>
			<p>“It will be a simple matter now to return and get it,” said AchmetZek. “First we will await the coming of the rash Waziri, and after wehave slain them we may take our time to the treasure⁠—none will disturb itwhere it lies, for we shall leave none alive who knows of its existence.</p>
			<p>“And the woman?” asked Werper.</p>
			<p>“I shall sell her in the north,” replied the raider. “It isthe only way, now. She should bring a good price.”</p>
			<p>The Belgian nodded. He was thinking rapidly. If he could persuade Achmet Zek tosend him in command of the party which took Lady Greystoke north it would givehim the opportunity he craved to make his escape from his chief. He wouldforego a share of the gold, if he could but get away unscathed with the jewels.</p>
			<p>He knew Achmet Zek well enough by this time to know that no member of his bandever was voluntarily released from the service of Achmet Zek. Most of the fewwho deserted were recaptured. More than once had Werper listened to theiragonized screams as they were tortured before being put to death. The Belgianhad no wish to take the slightest chance of recapture.</p>
			<p>“Who will go north with the woman,” he asked, “while we arereturning for the gold that the Waziri buried by the bungalow of theEnglishman?”</p>
			<p>Achmet Zek thought for a moment. The buried gold was of much greater value thanthe price the woman would bring. It was necessary to rid himself of her asquickly as possible and it was also well to obtain the gold with the leastpossible delay. Of all his followers, the Belgian was the most logicallieutenant to intrust with the command of one of the parties. An Arab, asfamiliar with the trails and tribes as Achmet Zek himself, might collect thewoman’s price and make good his escape into the far north. Werper, on theother hand, could scarce make his escape alone through a country hostile toEuropeans while the men he would send with the Belgian could be carefullyselected with a view to preventing Werper from persuading any considerableportion of his command to accompany him should he contemplate desertion of hischief.</p>
			<p>At last the Arab spoke: “It is not necessary that we both return for thegold. You shall go north with the woman, carrying a letter to a friend of minewho is always in touch with the best markets for such merchandise, while Ireturn for the gold. We can meet again here when our business isconcluded.”</p>
			<p>Werper could scarce disguise the joy with which he received this welcomedecision. And that he did entirely disguise it from the keen and suspiciouseyes of Achmet Zek is open to question. However, the decision reached, the Araband his lieutenant discussed the details of their forthcoming ventures for ashort time further, when Werper made his excuses and returned to his own tentfor the comforts and luxury of a long-desired bath and shave.</p>
			<p>Having bathed, the Belgian tied a small hand mirror to a cord sewn to the rearwall of his tent, placed a rude chair beside an equally rude table that stoodbeside the glass, and proceeded to remove the rough stubble from his face.</p>
			<p>In the catalog of masculine pleasures there is scarce one which imparts afeeling of greater comfort and refreshment than follows a clean shave, and now,with weariness temporarily banished, Albert Werper sprawled in his ricketychair to enjoy a final cigaret before retiring. His thumbs, tucked in his beltin lazy support of the weight of his arms, touched the belt which held thejewel pouch about his waist. He tingled with excitement as he let his minddwell upon the value of the treasure, which, unknown to all save himself, layhidden beneath his clothing.</p>
			<p>What would Achmet Zek say, if he knew? Werper grinned. How the oldrascal’s eyes would pop could he but have a glimpse of thosescintillating beauties! Werper had never yet had an opportunity to feast hiseyes for any great length of time upon them. He had not even countedthem⁠—only roughly had he guessed at their value.</p>
			<p>He unfastened the belt and drew the pouch from its hiding place. He was alone.The balance of the camp, save the sentries, had retired⁠—none would enterthe Belgian’s tent. He fingered the pouch, feeling out the shapes andsizes of the precious, little nodules within. He hefted the bag, first in onepalm, then in the other, and at last he wheeled his chair slowly around beforethe table, and in the rays of his small lamp let the glittering gems roll outupon the rough wood.</p>
			<p>The refulgent rays transformed the interior of the soiled and squalid canvas tothe splendor of a palace in the eyes of the dreaming man. He saw the gildedhalls of pleasure that would open their portals to the possessor of the wealthwhich lay scattered upon this stained and dented table top. He dreamed of joysand luxuries and power which always had been beyond his grasp, and as hedreamed his gaze lifted from the table, as the gaze of a dreamer will, to a fardistant goal above the mean horizon of terrestrial commonplaceness.</p>
			<p>Unseeing, his eyes rested upon the shaving mirror which still hung upon thetent wall above the table; but his sight was focused far beyond. And then areflection moved within the polished surface of the tiny glass, the man’seyes shot back out of space to the mirror’s face, and in it he sawreflected the grim visage of Achmet Zek, framed in the flaps of the tentdoorway behind him.</p>
			<p>Werper stifled a gasp of dismay. With rare self-possession he let his gazedrop, without appearing to have halted upon the mirror until it rested againupon the gems. Without haste, he replaced them in the pouch, tucked the latterinto his shirt, selected a cigaret from his case, lighted it and rose. Yawning,and stretching his arms above his head, he turned slowly toward the oppositeend of the tent. The face of Achmet Zek had disappeared from the opening.</p>
			<p>To say that Albert Werper was terrified would be putting it mildly. He realizedthat he not only had sacrificed his treasure; but his life as well. Achmet Zekwould never permit the wealth that he had discovered to slip through hisfingers, nor would he forgive the duplicity of a lieutenant who had gainedpossession of such a treasure without offering to share it with his chief.</p>
			<p>Slowly the Belgian prepared for bed. If he were being watched, he could notknow; but if so the watcher saw no indication of the nervous excitement whichthe European strove to conceal. When ready for his blankets, the man crossed tothe little table and extinguished the light.</p>
			<p>It was two hours later that the flaps at the front of the tent separatedsilently and gave entrance to a dark-robed figure, which passed noiselesslyfrom the darkness without to the darkness within. Cautiously the prowlercrossed the interior. In one hand was a long knife. He came at last to the pileof blankets spread upon several rugs close to one of the tent walls.</p>
			<p>Lightly, his fingers sought and found the bulk beneath the blankets⁠—thebulk that should be Albert Werper. They traced out the figure of a man, andthen an arm shot upward, poised for an instant and descended. Again and againit rose and fell, and each time the long blade of the knife buried itself inthe thing beneath the blankets. But there was an initial lifelessness in thesilent bulk that gave the assassin momentary wonder. Feverishly he threw backthe coverlets, and searched with nervous hands for the pouch of jewels which heexpected to find concealed upon his victim’s body.</p>
			<p>An instant later he rose with a curse upon his lips. It was Achmet Zek, and hecursed because he had discovered beneath the blankets of his lieutenant only apile of discarded clothing arranged in the form and semblance of a sleepingman⁠—Albert Werper had fled.</p>
			<p>Out into the village ran the chief, calling in angry tones to the sleepy Arabs,who tumbled from their tents in answer to his voice. But though they searchedthe village again and again they found no trace of the Belgian. Foaming withanger, Achmet Zek called his followers to horse, and though the night waspitchy black they set out to scour the adjoining forest for their quarry.</p>
			<p>As they galloped from the open gates, Mugambi, hiding in a nearby bush,slipped, unseen, within the palisade. A score of blacks crowded about theentrance to watch the searchers depart, and as the last of them passed out ofthe village the blacks seized the portals and drew them to, and Mugambi lent ahand in the work as though the best of his life had been spent among theraiders.</p>
			<p>In the darkness he passed, unchallenged, as one of their number, and as theyreturned from the gates to their respective tents and huts, Mugambi melted intothe shadows and disappeared.</p>
			<p>For an hour he crept about in the rear of the various huts and tents in aneffort to locate that in which his master’s mate was imprisoned. Onethere was which he was reasonably assured contained her, for it was the onlyhut before the door of which a sentry had been posted. Mugambi was crouching inthe shadow of this structure, just around the corner from the unsuspectingguard, when another approached to relieve his comrade.</p>
			<p>“The prisoner is safe within?” asked the newcomer.</p>
			<p>“She is,” replied the other, “for none has passed thisdoorway since I came.”</p>
			<p>The new sentry squatted beside the door, while he whom he had relieved made hisway to his own hut. Mugambi slunk closer to the corner of the building. In onepowerful hand he gripped a heavy knob-stick. No sign of elation disturbed hisphlegmatic calm, yet inwardly he was aroused to joy by the proof he had justheard that “Lady” really was within.</p>
			<p>The sentry’s back was toward the corner of the hut which hid the giantblack. The fellow did not see the huge form which silently loomed behind him.The knob-stick swung upward in a curve, and downward again. There was the soundof a dull thud, the crushing of heavy bone, and the sentry slumped into asilent, inanimate lump of clay.</p>
			<p>A moment later Mugambi was searching the interior of the hut. At first slowly,calling, “Lady!” in a low whisper, and finally with almost frantichaste, until the truth presently dawned upon him⁠—the hut was empty!</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
