<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>CHAPTER IV.Prophecy and Fulfillment</h2>
			<p>Then Tarzan turned his attention to the man. He had not slain Numa to save theNegro—he had merely done it in revenge upon the lion; but now that he sawthe old man lying helpless and dying before him something akin to pity touchedhis savage heart. In his youth he would have slain the witch-doctor without theslightest compunction; but civilization had had its softening effect upon himeven as it does upon the nations and races which it touches, though it had notyet gone far enough with Tarzan to render him either cowardly or effeminate. Hesaw an old man suffering and dying, and he stooped and felt of his wounds andstanched the flow of blood.</p>
			<p>“Who are you?” asked the old man in a trembling voice.</p>
			<p>“I am Tarzan—Tarzan of the Apes,” replied the ape-man and notwithout a greater touch of pride than he would have said, “I am JohnClayton, Lord Greystoke.”</p>
			<p>The witch-doctor shook convulsively and closed his eyes. When he opened themagain there was in them a resignation to whatever horrible fate awaited him atthe hands of this feared demon of the woods. “Why do you not killme?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“Why should I kill you?” inquired Tarzan. “You have notharmed me, and anyway you are already dying. Numa, the lion, has killedyou.”</p>
			<p>“You would not kill me?” Surprise and incredulity were in the tonesof the quavering old voice.</p>
			<p>“I would save you if I could,” replied Tarzan, “but thatcannot be done. Why did you think I would kill you?”</p>
			<p>For a moment the old man was silent. When he spoke it was evidently after somelittle effort to muster his courage. “I knew you of old,” he said,“when you ranged the jungle in the country of Mbonga, the chief. I wasalready a witch-doctor when you slew Kulonga and the others, and when yourobbed our huts and our poison pot. At first I did not remember you; but atlast I did—the white-skinned ape that lived with the hairy apes and madelife miserable in the village of Mbonga, the chief—the forestgod—the Munango-Keewati for whom we set food outside our gates and whocame and ate it. Tell me before I die—are you man or devil?”</p>
			<p>Tarzan laughed. “I am a man,” he said.</p>
			<p>The old fellow sighed and shook his head. “You have tried to save me fromSimba,” he said. “For that I shall reward you. I am a greatwitch-doctor. Listen to me, white man! I see bad days ahead of you. It is writin my own blood which I have smeared upon my palm. A god greater even than youwill rise up and strike you down. Turn back, Munango-Keewati! Turn back beforeit is too late. Danger lies ahead of you and danger lurks behind; but greateris the danger before. I see—” He paused and drew a long, gaspingbreath. Then he crumpled into a little, wrinkled heap and died. Tarzan wonderedwhat else he had seen.</p>
			<p>It was very late when the ape-man re-entered the boma and lay down among hisblack warriors. None had seen him go and none saw him return. He thought aboutthe warning of the old witch-doctor before he fell asleep and he thought of itagain after he awoke; but he did not turn back for he was unafraid, though hadhe known what lay in store for one he loved most in all the world he would haveflown through the trees to her side and allowed the gold of Opar to remainforever hidden in its forgotten storehouse.</p>
			<p>Behind him that morning another white man pondered something he had heardduring the night and very nearly did he give up his project and turn back uponhis trail. It was Werper, the murderer, who in the still of the night had heardfar away upon the trail ahead of him a sound that had filled his cowardly soulwith terror—a sound such as he never before had heard in all his life,nor dreamed that such a frightful thing could emanate from the lungs of aGod-created creature. He had heard the victory cry of the bull ape as Tarzanhad screamed it forth into the face of Goro, the moon, and he had trembled thenand hidden his face; and now in the broad light of a new day he trembled againas he recalled it, and would have turned back from the nameless danger the echoof that frightful sound seemed to portend, had he not stood in even greaterfear of Achmet Zek, his master.</p>
			<p>And so Tarzan of the Apes forged steadily ahead toward Opar’s ruinedramparts and behind him slunk Werper, jackal-like, and only God knew what layin store for each.</p>
			<p>At the edge of the desolate valley, overlooking the golden domes and minaretsof Opar, Tarzan halted. By night he would go alone to the treasure vault,reconnoitering, for he had determined that caution should mark his every moveupon this expedition.</p>
			<p>With the coming of night he set forth, and Werper, who had scaled the cliffsalone behind the ape-man’s party, and hidden through the day among therough boulders of the mountain top, slunk stealthily after him. Theboulder-strewn plain between the valley’s edge and the mighty granitekopje, outside the city’s walls, where lay the entrance to thepassage-way leading to the treasure vault, gave the Belgian ample cover as hefollowed Tarzan toward Opar.</p>
			<p>He saw the giant ape-man swing himself nimbly up the face of the great rock.Werper, clawing fearfully during the perilous ascent, sweating in terror,almost palsied by fear, but spurred on by avarice, following upward, until atlast he stood upon the summit of the rocky hill.</p>
			<p>Tarzan was nowhere in sight. For a time Werper hid behind one of the lesserboulders that were scattered over the top of the hill, but, seeing or hearingnothing of the Englishman, he crept from his place of concealment to undertakea systematic search of his surroundings, in the hope that he might discover thelocation of the treasure in ample time to make his escape before Tarzanreturned, for it was the Belgian’s desire merely to locate the gold,that, after Tarzan had departed, he might come in safety with his followers andcarry away as much as he could transport.</p>
			<p>He found the narrow cleft leading downward into the heart of the kopje alongwell-worn, granite steps. He advanced quite to the dark mouth of the tunnelinto which the runway disappeared; but here he halted, fearing to enter, lesthe meet Tarzan returning.</p>
			<p>The ape-man, far ahead of him, groped his way along the rocky passage, until hecame to the ancient wooden door. A moment later he stood within the treasurechamber, where, ages since, long-dead hands had ranged the lofty rows ofprecious ingots for the rulers of that great continent which now lies submergedbeneath the waters of the Atlantic.</p>
			<p>No sound broke the stillness of the subterranean vault. There was no evidencethat another had discovered the forgotten wealth since last the ape-man hadvisited its hiding place.</p>
			<p>Satisfied, Tarzan turned and retraced his steps toward the summit of the kopje.Werper, from the concealment of a jutting, granite shoulder, watched him passup from the shadows of the stairway and advance toward the edge of the hillwhich faced the rim of the valley where the Waziri awaited the signal of theirmaster. Then Werper, slipping stealthily from his hiding place, dropped intothe somber darkness of the entrance and disappeared.</p>
			<p>Tarzan, halting upon the kopje’s edge, raised his voice in the thunderousroar of a lion. Twice, at regular intervals, he repeated the call, standing inattentive silence for several minutes after the echoes of the third call haddied away. And then, from far across the valley, faintly, came an answeringroar—once, twice, thrice. Basuli, the Waziri chieftain, had heard andreplied.</p>
			<p>Tarzan again made his way toward the treasure vault, knowing that in a fewhours his blacks would be with him, ready to bear away another fortune in thestrangely shaped, golden ingots of Opar. In the meantime he would carry as muchof the precious metal to the summit of the kopje as he could.</p>
			<p>Six trips he made in the five hours before Basuli reached the kopje, and at theend of that time he had transported forty-eight ingots to the edge of the greatboulder, carrying upon each trip a load which might well have staggered twoordinary men, yet his giant frame showed no evidence of fatigue, as he helpedto raise his ebon warriors to the hill top with the rope that had been broughtfor the purpose.</p>
			<p>Six times he had returned to the treasure chamber, and six times Werper, theBelgian, had cowered in the black shadows at the far end of the long vault.Once again came the ape-man, and this time there came with him fifty fightingmen, turning porters for love of the only creature in the world who mightcommand of their fierce and haughty natures such menial service. Fifty-two moreingots passed out of the vaults, making the total of one hundred which Tarzanintended taking away with him.</p>
			<p>As the last of the Waziri filed from the chamber, Tarzan turned back for a lastglimpse of the fabulous wealth upon which his two inroads had made noappreciable impression. Before he extinguished the single candle he had broughtwith him for the purpose, and the flickering light of which had cast the firstalleviating rays into the impenetrable darkness of the buried chamber, that ithad known for the countless ages since it had lain forgotten of man,Tarzan’s mind reverted to that first occasion upon which he had enteredthe treasure vault, coming upon it by chance as he fled from the pits beneaththe temple, where he had been hidden by La, the High Priestess of the SunWorshipers.</p>
			<p>He recalled the scene within the temple when he had lain stretched upon thesacrificial altar, while La, with high-raised dagger, stood above him, and therows of priests and priestesses awaited, in the ecstatic hysteria offanaticism, the first gush of their victim’s warm blood, that they mightfill their golden goblets and drink to the glory of their Flaming God.</p>
			<p>The brutal and bloody interruption by Tha, the mad priest, passed vividlybefore the ape-man’s recollective eyes, the flight of the votaries beforethe insane blood lust of the hideous creature, the brutal attack upon La, andhis own part of the grim tragedy when he had battled with the infuriatedOparian and left him dead at the feet of the priestess he would have profaned.</p>
			<p>This and much more passed through Tarzan’s memory as he stood gazing atthe long tiers of dull-yellow metal. He wondered if La still ruled the templesof the ruined city whose crumbling walls rose upon the very foundations abouthim. Had she finally been forced into a union with one of her grotesquepriests? It seemed a hideous fate, indeed, for one so beautiful. With a shakeof his head, Tarzan stepped to the flickering candle, extinguished its feeblerays and turned toward the exit.</p>
			<p>Behind him the spy waited for him to be gone. He had learned the secret forwhich he had come, and now he could return at his leisure to his waitingfollowers, bring them to the treasure vault and carry away all the gold thatthey could stagger under.</p>
			<p>The Waziri had reached the outer end of the tunnel, and were winding upwardtoward the fresh air and the welcome starlight of the kopje’s summit,before Tarzan shook off the detaining hand of reverie and started slowly afterthem.</p>
			<p>Once again, and, he thought, for the last time, he closed the massive door ofthe treasure room. In the darkness behind him Werper rose and stretched hiscramped muscles. He stretched forth a hand and lovingly caressed a golden ingoton the nearest tier. He raised it from its immemorial resting place and weighedit in his hands. He clutched it to his bosom in an ecstasy of avarice.</p>
			<p>Tarzan dreamed of the happy homecoming which lay before him, of dear arms abouthis neck, and a soft cheek pressed to his; but there rose to dispel that dreamthe memory of the old witch-doctor and his warning.</p>
			<p>And then, in the span of a few brief seconds, the hopes of both these men wereshattered. The one forgot even his greed in the panic of terror—the otherwas plunged into total forgetfulness of the past by a jagged fragment of rockwhich gashed a deep cut upon his head.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
