<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter XXIV: Home</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Chapter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Home</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>As Tarzan of the Apes hurtled through the trees the discordant sounds of thebattle between the Abyssinians and the lions smote more and more distinctlyupon his sensitive ears, redoubling his assurance that the plight of the humanelement of the conflict was critical indeed.</p>
			<p>At last the glare of the camp fire shone plainly through the intervening trees, and a moment later the giant figure of the ape-man paused upon an overhangingbough to look down upon the bloody scene of carnage below.</p>
			<p>His quick eye took in the whole scene with a single comprehending glance andstopped upon the figure of a woman standing facing a great lion across thecarcass of a horse.</p>
			<p>The carnivore was crouching to spring as Tarzan discovered the tragic tableau.Numa was almost beneath the branch upon which the ape-man stood, naked andunarmed. There was not even an instant’s hesitation upon the part of thelatter⁠—it was as though he had not even paused in his swift progressthrough the trees, so lightning-like his survey and comprehension of the scenebelow him⁠—so instantaneous his consequent action.</p>
			<p>So hopeless had seemed her situation to her that Jane Clayton but stood inlethargic apathy awaiting the impact of the huge body that would hurl her tothe ground⁠—awaiting the momentary agony that cruel talons and grislyfangs may inflict before the coming of the merciful oblivion which would endher sorrow and her suffering.</p>
			<p>What use to attempt escape? As well face the hideous end as to be dragged downfrom behind in futile flight. She did not even close her eyes to shut out thefrightful aspect of that snarling face, and so it was that as she saw the lionpreparing to charge she saw, too, a bronzed and mighty figure leap from anoverhanging tree at the instant that Numa rose in his spring.</p>
			<p>Wide went her eyes in wonder and incredulity, as she beheld this seemingapparition risen from the dead. The lion was forgotten⁠—her ownperil⁠—everything save the wondrous miracle of this strange recrudescence.With parted lips, with palms tight pressed against her heaving bosom, the girlleaned forward, large-eyed, enthralled by the vision of her dead mate.</p>
			<p>She saw the sinewy form leap to the shoulder of the lion, hurtling against theleaping beast like a huge, animate battering ram. She saw the carnivore brushedaside as he was almost upon her, and in the instant she realized that nosubstanceless wraith could thus turn the charge of a maddened lion with bruteforce greater than the brute’s.</p>
			<p>Tarzan, her Tarzan, lived! A cry of unspeakable gladness broke from her lips, only to die in terror as she saw the utter defenselessness of her mate, andrealized that the lion had recovered himself and was turning upon Tarzan in madlust for vengeance.</p>
			<p>At the ape-man’s feet lay the discarded rifle of the dead Abyssinianwhose mutilated corpse sprawled where Numa had abandoned it. The quick glancewhich had swept the ground for some weapon of defense discovered it, and as thelion reared upon his hind legs to seize the rash man-thing who had daredinterpose its puny strength between Numa and his prey, the heavy stock whirredthrough the air and splintered upon the broad forehead.</p>
			<p>Not as an ordinary mortal might strike a blow did Tarzan of the Apes strike; but with the maddened frenzy of a wild beast backed by the steel thews whichhis wild, arboreal boyhood had bequeathed him. When the blow ended thesplintered stock was driven through the splintered skull into the savage brain, and the heavy iron barrel was bent into a rude <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>.</p>
			<p>In the instant that the lion sank, lifeless, to the ground, Jane Clayton threwherself into the eager arms of her husband. For a brief instant he strained herdear form to his breast, and then a glance about him awakened the ape-man tothe dangers which still surrounded them.</p>
			<p>Upon every hand the lions were still leaping upon new victims. Fear-maddenedhorses still menaced them with their erratic bolting from one side of theenclosure to the other. Bullets from the guns of the defenders who remainedalive but added to the perils of their situation.</p>
			<p>To remain was to court death. Tarzan seized Jane Clayton and lifted her to abroad shoulder. The blacks who had witnessed his advent looked on in amazementas they saw the naked giant leap easily into the branches of the tree fromwhence he had dropped so uncannily upon the scene, and vanish as he had come, bearing away their prisoner with him.</p>
			<p>They were too well occupied in self-defense to attempt to halt him, nor couldthey have done so other than by the wasting of a precious bullet which might beneeded the next instant to turn the charge of a savage foe.</p>
			<p>And so, unmolested, Tarzan passed from the camp of the Abyssinians, from whichthe din of conflict followed him deep into the jungle until distance graduallyobliterated it entirely.</p>
			<p>Back to the spot where he had left Werper went the ape-man, joy in his heartnow, where fear and sorrow had so recently reigned; and in his mind adetermination to forgive the Belgian and aid him in making good his escape. Butwhen he came to the place, Werper was gone, and though Tarzan called aloud manytimes he received no reply. Convinced that the man had purposely eluded him forreasons of his own, John Clayton felt that he was under no obligations toexpose his wife to further danger and discomfort in the prosecution of a morethorough search for the missing Belgian.</p>
			<p>“He has acknowledged his guilt by his flight, Jane,” he said.“We will let him go to lie in the bed that he has made forhimself.”</p>
			<p>Straight as homing pigeons, the two made their way toward the ruin anddesolation that had once been the center of their happy lives, and which wassoon to be restored by the willing black hands of laughing laborers, made happyagain by the return of the master and mistress whom they had mourned as dead.</p>
			<p>Past the village of Achmet Zek their way led them, and there they found but thecharred remains of the palisade and the native huts, still smoking, as muteevidence of the wrath and vengeance of a powerful enemy.</p>
			<p>“The Waziri,” commented Tarzan with a grim smile.</p>
			<p>“God bless them!” cried Jane Clayton.</p>
			<p>“They cannot be far ahead of us,” said Tarzan, “Basuli andthe others. The gold is gone and the jewels of Opar, Jane; but we have eachother and the Waziri⁠—and we have love and loyalty and friendship. Andwhat are gold and jewels to these?”</p>
			<p>“If only poor Mugambi lived,” she replied, “and those otherbrave fellows who sacrificed their lives in vain endeavor to protect me!”</p>
			<p>In the silence of mingled joy and sorrow they passed along through the familiarjungle, and as the afternoon was waning there came faintly to the ears of theape-man the murmuring cadence of distant voices.</p>
			<p>“We are nearing the Waziri, Jane,” he said. “I can hear themahead of us. They are going into camp for the night, I imagine.”</p>
			<p>A half hour later the two came upon a horde of ebon warriors which Basuli hadcollected for his war of vengeance upon the raiders. With them were thecaptured women of the tribe whom they had found in the village of Achmet Zek, and tall, even among the giant Waziri, loomed a familiar black form at the sideof Basuli. It was Mugambi, whom Jane had thought dead amidst the charred ruinsof the bungalow.</p>
			<p>Ah, such a reunion! Long into the night the dancing and the singing and thelaughter awoke the echoes of the somber wood. Again and again were the storiesof their various adventures retold. Again and once again they fought theirbattles with savage beast and savage man, and dawn was already breaking whenBasuli, for the fortieth time, narrated how he and a handful of his warriorshad watched the battle for the golden ingots which the Abyssinians of AbdulMourak had waged against the Arab raiders of Achmet Zek, and how, when thevictors had ridden away they had sneaked out of the river reeds and stolen awaywith the precious ingots to hide them where no robber eye ever could discoverthem.</p>
			<p>Pieced out from the fragments of their various experiences with the Belgian thetruth concerning the malign activities of Albert Werper became apparent. OnlyLady Greystoke found aught to praise in the conduct of the man, and it wasdifficult even for her to reconcile his many heinous acts with this oneevidence of chivalry and honor.</p>
			<p>“Deep in the soul of every man,” said Tarzan, “must lurk thegerm of righteousness. It was your own virtue, Jane, rather even than yourhelplessness which awakened for an instant the latent decency of this degradedman. In that one act he retrieved himself, and when he is called to face hisMaker may it outweigh in the balance, all the sins he has committed.”</p>
			<p>And Jane Clayton breathed a fervent, “Amen!”</p>
			<p>Months had passed. The labor of the Waziri and the gold of Opar had rebuilt andrefurnished the wasted homestead of the Greystokes. Once more the simple lifeof the great African farm went on as it had before the coming of the Belgianand the Arab. Forgotten were the sorrows and dangers of yesterday.</p>
			<p>For the first time in months Lord Greystoke felt that he might indulge in aholiday, and so a great hunt was organized that the faithful laborers mightfeast in celebration of the completion of their work.</p>
			<p>In itself the hunt was a success, and ten days after its inauguration, awell-laden safari took up its return march toward the Waziri plain. Lord andLady Greystoke with Basuli and Mugambi rode together at the head of the column, laughing and talking together in that easy familiarity which common interestsand mutual respect breed between honest and intelligent men of any races.</p>
			<p>Jane Clayton’s horse shied suddenly at an object half hidden in the longgrasses of an open space in the jungle. Tarzan’s keen eyes sought quicklyfor an explanation of the animal’s action.</p>
			<p>“What have we here?” he cried, swinging from his saddle, and amoment later the four were grouped about a human skull and a little litter ofwhitened human bones.</p>
			<p>Tarzan stooped and lifted a leathern pouch from the grisly relics of a man. Thehard outlines of the contents brought an exclamation of surprise to his lips.</p>
			<p>“The jewels of Opar!” he cried, holding the pouch aloft, “and,” pointing to the bones at his feet, “all that remainsof Werper, the Belgian.”</p>
			<p>Mugambi laughed. “Look within, Bwana,” he cried, “and youwill see what are the jewels of Opar⁠—you will see what the Belgian gavehis life for,” and the black laughed aloud.</p>
			<p>“Why do you laugh?” asked Tarzan.</p>
			<p>“Because,” replied Mugambi, “I filled the Belgian’spouch with river gravel before I escaped the camp of the Abyssinians whoseprisoners we were. I left the Belgian only worthless stones, while I broughtaway with me the jewels he had stolen from you. That they were afterward stolenfrom me while I slept in the jungle is my shame and my disgrace; but at leastthe Belgian lost them⁠—open his pouch and you will see.”</p>
			<p>Tarzan untied the thong which held the mouth of the leathern bag closed, andpermitted the contents to trickle slowly forth into his open palm.Mugambi’s eyes went wide at the sight, and the others utteredexclamations of surprise and incredulity, for from the rusty and weatherwornpouch ran a stream of brilliant, scintillating gems.</p>
			<p>“The jewels of Opar!” cried Tarzan. “But how did Werper comeby them again?”</p>
			<p>None could answer, for both Chulk and Werper were dead, and no other knew.</p>
			<p>“Poor devil!” said the ape-man, as he swung back into his saddle.“Even in death he has made restitution⁠—let his sins lie with hisbones.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
