<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter XIX: Jane Clayton and the Beasts of the Jungle</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Chapter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Jane Clayton and the Beasts of the Jungle</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Mugambi, after his successful break for liberty, had fallen upon hard times.His way had led him through a country with which he was unfamiliar, a junglecountry in which he could find no water, and but little food, so that afterseveral days of wandering he found himself so reduced in strength that he couldbarely drag himself along.</p>
			<p>It was with growing difficulty that he found the strength necessary toconstruct a shelter by night wherein he might be reasonably safe from the largecarnivora, and by day he still further exhausted his strength in digging foredible roots, and searching for water.</p>
			<p>A few stagnant pools at considerable distances apart saved him from death bythirst; but his was a pitiable state when finally he stumbled by accident upona large river in a country where fruit was abundant, and small game which hemight bag by means of a combination of stealth, cunning, and a crude knob-stickwhich he had fashioned from a fallen limb.</p>
			<p>Realizing that he still had a long march ahead of him before he could reacheven the outskirts of the Waziri country, Mugambi wisely decided to remainwhere he was until he had recuperated his strength and health. A fewdays’ rest would accomplish wonders for him, he knew, and he could illafford to sacrifice his chances for a safe return by setting forth handicappedby weakness.</p>
			<p>And so it was that he constructed a substantial thorn boma, and rigged athatched shelter within it, where he might sleep by night in security, and fromwhich he sallied forth by day to hunt the flesh which alone could return to hisgiant thews their normal prowess.</p>
			<p>One day, as he hunted, a pair of savage eyes discovered him from theconcealment of the branches of a great tree beneath which the black warriorpassed. Bloodshot, wicked eyes they were, set in a fierce and hairy face.</p>
			<p>They watched Mugambi make his little kill of a small rodent, and they followedhim as he returned to his hut, their owner moving quietly through the treesupon the trail of the Negro.</p>
			<p>The creature was Chulk, and he looked down upon the unconscious man more incuriosity than in hate. The wearing of the Arab burnoose which Tarzan hadplaced upon his person had aroused in the mind of the anthropoid a desire forsimilar mimicry of the Tarmangani. The burnoose, though, had obstructed hismovements and proven such a nuisance that the ape had long since torn it fromhim and thrown it away.</p>
			<p>Now, however, he saw a Gomangani arrayed in less cumbersome apparel⁠—aloin cloth, a few copper ornaments and a feather headdress. These were more inline with Chulk’s desires than a flowing robe which was constantlygetting between one’s legs, and catching upon every limb and bush alongthe leafy trail.</p>
			<p>Chulk eyed the pouch, which, suspended over Mugambi’s shoulder, swungbeside his black hip. This took his fancy, for it was ornamented with feathersand a fringe, and so the ape hung about Mugambi’s boma, waiting anopportunity to seize either by stealth or might some object of theblack’s apparel.</p>
			<p>Nor was it long before the opportunity came. Feeling safe within his thornyenclosure, Mugambi was wont to stretch himself in the shade of his shelterduring the heat of the day, and sleep in peaceful security until the decliningsun carried with it the enervating temperature of midday.</p>
			<p>Watching from above, Chulk saw the black warrior stretched thus in theunconsciousness of sleep one sultry afternoon. Creeping out upon an overhangingbranch the anthropoid dropped to the ground within the boma. He approached thesleeper upon padded feet which gave forth no sound, and with an uncannywoodcraft that rustled not a leaf or a grass blade.</p>
			<p>Pausing beside the man, the ape bent over and examined his belongings. Great aswas the strength of Chulk there lay in the back of his little brain a somethingwhich deterred him from arousing the man to combat⁠—a sense that isinherent in all the lower orders, a strange fear of man, that rules even themost powerful of the jungle creatures at times.</p>
			<p>To remove Mugambi’s loin cloth without awakening him would be impossible, and the only detachable things were the knob-stick and the pouch, which hadfallen from the black’s shoulder as he rolled in sleep.</p>
			<p>Seizing these two articles, as better than nothing at all, Chulk retreated withhaste, and every indication of nervous terror, to the safety of the tree fromwhich he had dropped, and, still haunted by that indefinable terror which theclose proximity of man awakened in his breast, fled precipitately through thejungle. Aroused by attack, or supported by the presence of another of his kind, Chulk could have braved the presence of a score of human beings, butalone⁠—ah, that was a different matter⁠—alone, and unenraged.</p>
			<p>It was some time after Mugambi awoke that he missed the pouch. Instantly he wasall excitement. What could have become of it? It had been at his side when helay down to sleep⁠—of that he was certain, for had he not pushed it frombeneath him when its bulging bulk, pressing against his ribs, caused himdiscomfort? Yes, it had been there when he lay down to sleep. How then had itvanished?</p>
			<p>Mugambi’s savage imagination was filled with visions of the spirits ofdeparted friends and enemies, for only to the machinations of such as thesecould he attribute the disappearance of his pouch and knob-stick in the firstexcitement of the discovery of their loss; but later and more carefulinvestigation, such as his woodcraft made possible, revealed indisputableevidence of a more material explanation than his excited fancy and superstitionhad at first led him to accept.</p>
			<p>In the trampled turf beside him was the faint impress of huge, manlike feet.Mugambi raised his brows as the truth dawned upon him. Hastily leaving the bomahe searched in all directions about the enclosure for some further sign of thetell-tale spoor. He climbed trees and sought for evidence of the direction ofthe thief’s flight; but the faint signs left by a wary ape who elects totravel through the trees eluded the woodcraft of Mugambi. Tarzan might havefollowed them; but no ordinary mortal could perceive them, or perceiving, translate.</p>
			<p>The black, now strengthened and refreshed by his rest, felt ready to set outagain for Waziri, and finding himself another knob-stick, turned his back uponthe river and plunged into the mazes of the jungle.</p>
			<p>As Taglat struggled with the bonds which secured the ankles and wrists of hiscaptive, the great lion that eyed the two from behind a nearby clump of busheswormed closer to his intended prey.</p>
			<p>The ape’s back was toward the lion. He did not see the broad head, fringed by its rough mane, protruding through the leafy wall. He could not knowthat the powerful hind paws were gathering close beneath the tawny bellypreparatory to a sudden spring, and his first intimation of impending dangerwas the thunderous and triumphant roar which the charging lion could no longersuppress.</p>
			<p>Scarce pausing for a backward glance, Taglat abandoned the unconscious womanand fled in the opposite direction from the horrid sound which had broken in sounexpected and terrifying a manner upon his startled ears; but the warning hadcome too late to save him, and the lion, in his second bound, alighted fullupon the broad shoulders of the anthropoid.</p>
			<p>As the great bull went down there was awakened in him to the full all thecunning, all the ferocity, all the physical prowess which obey the mightiest ofthe fundamental laws of nature, the law of self-preservation, and turning uponhis back he closed with the carnivore in a death struggle so fearless andabandoned, that for a moment the great Numa himself may have trembled for theoutcome.</p>
			<p>Seizing the lion by the mane, Taglat buried his yellowed fangs deep in themonster’s throat, growling hideously through the muffled gag of blood andhair. Mixed with the ape’s voice the lion’s roars of rage and painreverberated through the jungle, till the lesser creatures of the wild, startled from their peaceful pursuits, scurried fearfully away.</p>
			<p>Rolling over and over upon the turf the two battled with demoniac fury, untilthe colossal cat, by doubling his hind paws far up beneath his belly sank histalons deep into Taglat’s chest, then, ripping downward with all hisstrength, Numa accomplished his design, and the disemboweled anthropoid, with alast spasmodic struggle, relaxed in limp and bloody dissolution beneath histitanic adversary.</p>
			<p>Scrambling to his feet, Numa looked about quickly in all directions, as thoughseeking to detect the possible presence of other foes; but only the still andunconscious form of the girl, lying a few paces from him met his gaze, and withan angry growl he placed a forepaw upon the body of his kill and raising hishead gave voice to his savage victory cry.</p>
			<p>For another moment he stood with fierce eyes roving to and fro about theclearing. At last they halted for a second time upon the girl. A low growlrumbled from the lion’s throat. His lower jaw rose and fell, and theslaver drooled and dripped upon the dead face of Taglat.</p>
			<p>Like two yellow-green augurs, wide and unblinking, the terrible eyes remainedfixed upon Jane Clayton. The erect and majestic pose of the great frame shranksuddenly into a sinister crouch as, slowly and gently as one who treads oneggs, the devil-faced cat crept forward toward the girl.</p>
			<p>Beneficent Fate maintained her in happy unconsciousness of the dread presencesneaking stealthily upon her. She did not know when the lion paused at herside. She did not hear the sniffing of his nostrils as he smelled about her.She did not feel the heat of the fetid breath upon her face, nor the drippingof the saliva from the frightful jaws half opened so close above her.</p>
			<p>Finally the lion lifted a forepaw and turned the body of the girl half over, then he stood again eyeing her as though still undetermined whether life wasextinct or not. Some noise or odor from the nearby jungle attracted hisattention for a moment. His eyes did not again return to Jane Clayton, andpresently he left her, walked over to the remains of Taglat, and crouching downupon his kill with his back toward the girl, proceeded to devour the ape.</p>
			<p>It was upon this scene that Jane Clayton at last opened her eyes. Inured todanger, she maintained her self-possession in the face of the startlingsurprise which her newfound consciousness revealed to her. She neither criedout nor moved a muscle, until she had taken in every detail of the scene whichlay within the range of her vision.</p>
			<p>She saw that the lion had killed the ape, and that he was devouring his preyless than fifty feet from where she lay; but what could she do? Her hands andfeet were bound. She must wait then, in what patience she could command, untilNuma had eaten and digested the ape, when, without doubt, he would return tofeast upon her, unless, in the meantime, the dread hyenas should discover her, or some other of the numerous prowling carnivora of the jungle.</p>
			<p>As she lay tormented by these frightful thoughts, she suddenly became consciousthat the bonds at her wrists and ankles no longer hurt her, and then of thefact that her hands were separated, one lying upon either side of her, insteadof both being confined at her back.</p>
			<p>Wonderingly she moved a hand. What miracle had been performed? It was notbound! Stealthily and noiselessly she moved her other limbs, only to discoverthat she was free. She could not know how the thing had happened, that Taglat, gnawing upon them for sinister purposes of his own, had cut them through but aninstant before Numa had frightened him from his victim.</p>
			<p>For a moment Jane Clayton was overwhelmed with joy and thanksgiving; but onlyfor a moment. What good was her newfound liberty in the face of the frightfulbeast crouching so close beside her? If she could have had this chance underdifferent conditions, how happily she would have taken advantage of it; but nowit was given to her when escape was practically impossible.</p>
			<p>The nearest tree was a hundred feet away, the lion less than fifty. To rise andattempt to reach the safety of those tantalizing branches would be but toinvite instant destruction, for Numa would doubtless be too jealous of thisfuture meal to permit it to escape with ease. And yet, too, there was anotherpossibility⁠—a chance which hinged entirely upon the unknown temper of thegreat beast.</p>
			<p>His belly already partially filled, he might watch with indifference thedeparture of the girl; yet could she afford to chance so improbable acontingency? She doubted it. Upon the other hand she was no more minded toallow this frail opportunity for life to entirely elude her without taking orattempting to take some advantage from it.</p>
			<p>She watched the lion narrowly. He could not see her without turning his headmore than halfway around. She would attempt a ruse. Silently she rolled over inthe direction of the nearest tree, and away from the lion, until she lay againin the same position in which Numa had left her, but a few feet farther fromhim.</p>
			<p>Here she lay breathless watching the lion; but the beast gave no indicationthat he had heard aught to arouse his suspicions. Again she rolled over, gaining a few more feet and again she lay in rigid contemplation of thebeast’s back.</p>
			<p>During what seemed hours to her tense nerves, Jane Clayton continued thesetactics, and still the lion fed on in apparent unconsciousness that his secondprey was escaping him. Already the girl was but a few paces from thetree⁠—a moment more and she would be close enough to chance springing toher feet, throwing caution aside and making a sudden, bold dash for safety. Showas halfway over in her turn, her face away from the lion, when he suddenlyturned his great head and fastened his eyes upon her. He saw her roll over uponher side away from him, and then her eyes were turned again toward him, and thecold sweat broke from the girl’s every pore as she realized that withlife almost within her grasp, death had found her out.</p>
			<p>For a long time neither the girl nor the lion moved. The beast lay motionless, his head turned upon his shoulders and his glaring eyes fixed upon the rigidvictim, now nearly fifty yards away. The girl stared back straight into thosecruel orbs, daring not to move even a muscle.</p>
			<p>The strain upon her nerves was becoming so unbearable that she could scarcelyrestrain a growing desire to scream, when Numa deliberately turned back to thebusiness of feeding; but his back-layed ears attested a sinister regard for theactions of the girl behind him.</p>
			<p>Realizing that she could not again turn without attracting his immediate andperhaps fatal attention, Jane Clayton resolved to risk all in one last attemptto reach the tree and clamber to the lower branches.</p>
			<p>Gathering herself stealthily for the effort, she leaped suddenly to her feet, but almost simultaneously the lion sprang up, wheeled and with wide-distendedjaws and terrific roars, charged swiftly down upon her.</p>
			<p>Those who have spent lifetimes hunting the big game of Africa will tell youthat scarcely any other creature in the world attains the speed of a charginglion. For the short distance that the great cat can maintain it, it resemblesnothing more closely than the onrushing of a giant locomotive under full speed, and so, though the distance that Jane Clayton must cover was relatively small, the terrific speed of the lion rendered her hopes of escape almost negligible.</p>
			<p>Yet fear can work wonders, and though the upward spring of the lion as heneared the tree into which she was scrambling brought his talons in contactwith her boots she eluded his raking grasp, and as he hurtled against the boleof her sanctuary, the girl drew herself into the safety of the branches abovehis reach.</p>
			<p>For some time the lion paced, growling and moaning, beneath the tree in whichJane Clayton crouched, panting and trembling. The girl was a prey to thenervous reaction from the frightful ordeal through which she had so recentlypassed, and in her overwrought state it seemed that never again should she daredescend to the ground among the fearsome dangers which infested the broadstretch of jungle that she knew must lie between herself and the nearestvillage of her faithful Waziri.</p>
			<p>It was almost dark before the lion finally quit the clearing, and even had hisplace beside the remnants of the mangled ape not been immediately usurped by apack of hyenas, Jane Clayton would scarcely have dared venture from her refugein the face of impending night, and so she composed herself as best she couldfor the long and tiresome wait, until daylight might offer some means of escapefrom the dread vicinity in which she had witnessed such terrifying adventures.</p>
			<p>Tired nature at last overcame even her fears, and she dropped into a deepslumber, cradled in a comparatively safe, though rather uncomfortable, positionagainst the bole of the tree, and supported by two large branches which grewoutward, almost horizontally, but a few inches apart.</p>
			<p>The sun was high in the heavens when she at last awoke, and beneath her was nosign either of Numa or the hyenas. Only the clean-picked bones of the ape, scattered about the ground, attested the fact of what had transpired in thisseemingly peaceful spot but a few hours before.</p>
			<p>Both hunger and thirst assailed her now, and realizing that she must descend ordie of starvation, she at last summoned courage to undertake the ordeal ofcontinuing her journey through the jungle.</p>
			<p>Descending from the tree, she set out in a southerly direction, toward thepoint where she believed the plains of Waziri lay, and though she knew thatonly ruin and desolation marked the spot where once her happy home had stood, she hoped that by coming to the broad plain she might eventually reach one ofthe numerous Waziri villages that were scattered over the surrounding country, or chance upon a roving band of these indefatigable huntsmen.</p>
			<p>The day was half spent when there broke unexpectedly upon her startled ears thesound of a rifle shot not far ahead of her. As she paused to listen, this firstshot was followed by another and another and another. What could it mean? Thefirst explanation which sprung to her mind attributed the firing to anencounter between the Arab raiders and a party of Waziri; but as she did notknow upon which side victory might rest, or whether she were behind friend orfoe, she dared not advance nearer on the chance of revealing herself to anenemy.</p>
			<p>After listening for several minutes she became convinced that no more than twoor three rifles were engaged in the fight, since nothing approximating thesound of a volley reached her ears; but still she hesitated to approach, and atlast, determining to take no chance, she climbed into the concealing foliage ofa tree beside the trail she had been following and there fearfully awaitedwhatever might reveal itself.</p>
			<p>As the firing became less rapid she caught the sound of men’s voices, though she could distinguish no words, and at last the reports of the gunsceased, and she heard two men calling to each other in loud tones. Then therewas a long silence which was finally broken by the stealthy padding offootfalls on the trail ahead of her, and in another moment a man appeared inview backing toward her, a rifle ready in his hands, and his eyes directed incareful watchfulness along the way that he had come.</p>
			<p>Almost instantly Jane Clayton recognized the man as <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Jules Frecoult, who sorecently had been a guest in her home. She was upon the point of calling to himin glad relief when she saw him leap quickly to one side and hide himself inthe thick verdure at the trail’s side. It was evident that he was beingfollowed by an enemy, and so Jane Clayton kept silent, lest she distractFrecoult’s attention, or guide his foe to his hiding place.</p>
			<p>Scarcely had Frecoult hidden himself than the figure of a white-robed Arabcrept silently along the trail in pursuit. From her hiding place, Jane Claytoncould see both men plainly. She recognized Achmet Zek as the leader of the bandof ruffians who had raided her home and made her a prisoner, and as she sawFrecoult, the supposed friend and ally, raise his gun and take careful aim atthe Arab, her heart stood still and every power of her soul was directed upon afervent prayer for the accuracy of his aim.</p>
			<p>Achmet Zek paused in the middle of the trail. His keen eyes scanned every bushand tree within the radius of his vision. His tall figure presented a perfecttarget to the perfidious assassin. There was a sharp report, and a little puffof smoke arose from the bush that hid the Belgian, as Achmet Zek stumbledforward and pitched, face down, upon the trail.</p>
			<p>As Werper stepped back into the trail, he was startled by the sound of a gladcry from above him, and as he wheeled about to discover the author of thisunexpected interruption, he saw Jane Clayton drop lightly from a nearby treeand run forward with outstretched hands to congratulate him upon his victory.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
