<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter XVI: Tarzan Again Leads the Mangani</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Chapter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Tarzan Again Leads the Mangani</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Achmet Zek with two of his followers had circled far to the south to interceptthe flight of his deserting lieutenant, Werper. Others had spread out invarious directions, so that a vast circle had been formed by them during thenight, and now they were beating in toward the center.</p>
			<p>Achmet and the two with him halted for a short rest just before noon. Theysquatted beneath the trees upon the southern edge of a clearing. The chief ofthe raiders was in ill humor. To have been outwitted by an unbeliever was badenough; but to have, at the same time, lost the jewels upon which he had sethis avaricious heart was altogether too much⁠—Allah must, indeed be angrywith his servant.</p>
			<p>Well, he still had the woman. She would bring a fair price in the north, andthere was, too, the buried treasure beside the ruins of the Englishman’shouse.</p>
			<p>A slight noise in the jungle upon the opposite side of the clearing broughtAchmet Zek to immediate and alert attention. He gathered his rifle in readinessfor instant use, at the same time motioning his followers to silence andconcealment. Crouching behind the bushes the three waited, their eyes fastenedupon the far side of the open space.</p>
			<p>Presently the foliage parted and a woman’s face appeared, glancingfearfully from side to side. A moment later, evidently satisfied that noimmediate danger lurked before her, she stepped out into the clearing in fullview of the Arab.</p>
			<p>Achmet Zek caught his breath with a muttered exclamation of incredulity and animprecation. The woman was the prisoner he had thought safely guarded at hiscamp!</p>
			<p>Apparently she was alone, but Achmet Zek waited that he might make sure of itbefore seizing her. Slowly Jane Clayton started across the clearing. Twicealready since she had quitted the village of the raiders had she barely escapedthe fangs of carnivora, and once she had almost stumbled into the path of oneof the searchers. Though she was almost despairing of ever reaching safety shestill was determined to fight on, until death or success terminated herendeavors.</p>
			<p>As the Arabs watched her from the safety of their concealment, and Achmet Zeknoted with satisfaction that she was walking directly into his clutches, another pair of eyes looked down upon the entire scene from the foliage of anadjacent tree.</p>
			<p>Puzzled, troubled eyes they were, for all their gray and savage glint, fortheir owner was struggling with an intangible suggestion of the familiarity ofthe face and figure of the woman below him.</p>
			<p>A sudden crashing of the bushes at the point from which Jane Clayton hademerged into the clearing brought her to a sudden stop and attracted theattention of the Arabs and the watcher in the tree to the same point.</p>
			<p>The woman wheeled about to see what new danger menaced her from behind, and asshe did so a great, anthropoid ape waddled into view. Behind him came anotherand another; but Lady Greystoke did not wait to learn how many more of thehideous creatures were so close upon her trail.</p>
			<p>With a smothered scream she rushed toward the opposite jungle, and as shereached the bushes there, Achmet Zek and his two henchmen rose up and seizedher. At the same instant a naked, brown giant dropped from the branches of atree at the right of the clearing.</p>
			<p>Turning toward the astonished apes he gave voice to a short volley of lowgutturals, and without waiting to note the effect of his words upon them, wheeled and charged for the Arabs.</p>
			<p>Achmet Zek was dragging Jane Clayton toward his tethered horse. His two menwere hastily unfastening all three mounts. The woman, struggling to escape theArab, turned and saw the ape-man running toward her. A glad light of hopeilluminated her face.</p>
			<p>“John!” she cried. “Thank God that you have come intime.”</p>
			<p>Behind Tarzan came the great apes, wondering, but obedient to his summons. TheArabs saw that they would not have time to mount and make their escape beforethe beasts and the man were upon them. Achmet Zek recognized the latter as theredoubtable enemy of such as he, and he saw, too, in the circumstance anopportunity to rid himself forever of the menace of the ape-man’spresence.</p>
			<p>Calling to his men to follow his example he raised his rifle and leveled itupon the charging giant. His followers, acting with no less alacrity thanhimself, fired almost simultaneously, and with the reports of the rifles, Tarzan of the Apes and two of his hairy henchmen pitched forward among thejungle grasses.</p>
			<p>The noise of the rifle shots brought the balance of the apes to a wonderingpause, and, taking advantage of their momentary distraction, Achmet Zek and hisfellows leaped to their horses’ backs and galloped away with the nowhopeless and grief-stricken woman.</p>
			<p>Back to the village they rode, and once again Lady Greystoke found herselfincarcerated in the filthy, little hut from which she had thought to haveescaped for good. But this time she was not only guarded by an additionalsentry, but bound as well.</p>
			<p>Singly and in twos the searchers who had ridden out with Achmet Zek upon thetrail of the Belgian, returned empty handed. With the report of each theraider’s rage and chagrin increased, until he was in such a transport offerocious anger that none dared approach him. Threatening and cursing, AchmetZek paced up and down the floor of his silken tent; but his temper served himnaught⁠—Werper was gone and with him the fortune in scintillating gemswhich had aroused the cupidity of his chief and placed the sentence of deathupon the head of the lieutenant.</p>
			<p>With the escape of the Arabs the great apes had turned their attention to theirfallen comrades. One was dead, but another and the great white ape stillbreathed. The hairy monsters gathered about these two, grumbling and mutteringafter the fashion of their kind.</p>
			<p>Tarzan was the first to regain consciousness. Sitting up, he looked about him.Blood was flowing from a wound in his shoulder. The shock had thrown him downand dazed him; but he was far from dead. Rising slowly to his feet he let hiseyes wander toward the spot where last he had seen the she, who had arousedwithin his savage breast such strange emotions.</p>
			<p>“Where is she?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“The Tarmangani took her away,” replied one of the apes. “Whoare you who speak the language of the Mangani?”</p>
			<p>“I am Tarzan,” replied the ape-man; “mighty hunter, greatestof fighters. When I roar, the jungle is silent and trembles with terror. I amTarzan of the Apes. I have been away; but now I have come back to mypeople.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” spoke up an old ape, “he is Tarzan. I know him. It iswell that he has come back. Now we shall have good hunting.”</p>
			<p>The other apes came closer and sniffed at the ape-man. Tarzan stood very still, his fangs half bared, and his muscles tense and ready for action; but there wasnone there to question his right to be with them, and presently, the inspectionsatisfactorily concluded, the apes again returned their attention to the othersurvivor.</p>
			<p>He too was but slightly wounded, a bullet, grazing his skull, having stunnedhim, so that when he regained consciousness he was apparently as fit as ever.</p>
			<p>The apes told Tarzan that they had been traveling toward the east when thescent spoor of the she had attracted them and they had stalked her. Now theywished to continue upon their interrupted march; but Tarzan preferred to followthe Arabs and take the woman from them. After a considerable argument it wasdecided that they should first hunt toward the east for a few days and thenreturn and search for the Arabs, and as time is of little moment to the apefolk, Tarzan acceded to their demands, he, himself, having reverted to a mentalstate but little superior to their own.</p>
			<p>Another circumstance which decided him to postpone pursuit of the Arabs was thepainfulness of his wound. It would be better to wait until that had healedbefore he pitted himself again against the guns of the Tarmangani.</p>
			<p>And so, as Jane Clayton was pushed into her prison hut and her hands and feetsecurely bound, her natural protector roamed off toward the east in companywith a score of hairy monsters, with whom he rubbed shoulders as familiarly asa few months before he had mingled with his immaculate fellow-members of one ofLondon’s most select and exclusive clubs.</p>
			<p>But all the time there lurked in the back of his injured brain a troublesomeconviction that he had no business where he was⁠—that he should be, forsome unaccountable reason, elsewhere and among another sort of creature. Also, there was the compelling urge to be upon the scent of the Arabs, undertakingthe rescue of the woman who had appealed so strongly to his savage sentiments; though the thought-word which naturally occurred to him in the contemplation ofthe venture, was “capture,” rather than “rescue.”</p>
			<p>To him she was as any other jungle she, and he had set his heart upon her ashis mate. For an instant, as he had approached closer to her in the clearingwhere the Arabs had seized her, the subtle aroma which had first aroused hisdesires in the hut that had imprisoned her had fallen upon his nostrils, andtold him that he had found the creature for whom he had developed so sudden andinexplicable a passion.</p>
			<p>The matter of the pouch of jewels also occupied his thoughts to some extent, sothat he found a double urge for his return to the camp of the raiders. He wouldobtain possession of both his pretty pebbles and the she. Then he would returnto the great apes with his new mate and his baubles, and leading his hairycompanions into a far wilderness beyond the ken of man, live out his life, hunting and battling among the lower orders after the only manner which he nowrecollected.</p>
			<p>He spoke to his fellow-apes upon the matter, in an attempt to persuade them toaccompany him; but all except Taglat and Chulk refused. The latter was youngand strong, endowed with a greater intelligence than his fellows, and thereforethe possessor of better developed powers of imagination. To him the expeditionsavored of adventure, and so appealed, strongly. With Taglat there was anotherincentive⁠—a secret and sinister incentive, which, had Tarzan of the Apeshad knowledge of it, would have sent him at the other’s throat in jealousrage.</p>
			<p>Taglat was no longer young; but he was still a formidable beast, mightilymuscled, cruel, and, because of his greater experience, crafty and cunning.Too, he was of giant proportions, the very weight of his huge bulk servingofttimes to discount in his favor the superior agility of a younger antagonist.</p>
			<p>He was of a morose and sullen disposition that marked him even among hisfrowning fellows, where such characteristics are the rule rather than theexception, and, though Tarzan did not guess it, he hated the ape-man with aferocity that he was able to hide only because the dominant spirit of thenobler creature had inspired within him a species of dread which was aspowerful as it was inexplicable to him.</p>
			<p>These two, then, were to be Tarzan’s companions upon his return to thevillage of Achmet Zek. As they set off, the balance of the tribe vouchsafedthem but a parting stare, and then resumed the serious business of feeding.</p>
			<p>Tarzan found difficulty in keeping the minds of his fellows set upon thepurpose of their adventure, for the mind of an ape lacks the power oflong-sustained concentration. To set out upon a long journey, with a definitedestination in view, is one thing, to remember that purpose and keep ituppermost in one’s mind continually is quite another. There are so manythings to distract one’s attention along the way.</p>
			<p>Chulk was, at first, for rushing rapidly ahead as though the village of theraiders lay but an hour’s march before them instead of several days; butwithin a few minutes a fallen tree attracted his attention with its suggestionof rich and succulent forage beneath, and when Tarzan, missing him, returned insearch, he found Chulk squatting beside the rotting bole, from beneath which hewas assiduously engaged in digging out the grubs and beetles, whose kind form aconsiderable proportion of the diet of the apes.</p>
			<p>Unless Tarzan desired to fight there was nothing to do but wait until Chulk hadexhausted the storehouse, and this he did, only to discover that Taglat was nowmissing. After a considerable search, he found that worthy gentlemancontemplating the sufferings of an injured rodent he had pounced upon. He wouldsit in apparent indifference, gazing in another direction, while the crippledcreature wriggled slowly and painfully away from him, and then, just as hisvictim felt assured of escape, he would reach out a giant palm and slam it downupon the fugitive. Again and again he repeated this operation, until, tiring ofthe sport, he ended the sufferings of his plaything by devouring it.</p>
			<p>Such were the exasperating causes of delay which retarded Tarzan’s returnjourney toward the village of Achmet Zek; but the ape-man was patient, for inhis mind was a plan which necessitated the presence of Chulk and Taglat when heshould have arrived at his destination.</p>
			<p>It was not always an easy thing to maintain in the vacillating minds of theanthropoids a sustained interest in their venture. Chulk was wearying of thecontinued marching and the infrequency and short duration of the rests. Hewould gladly have abandoned this search for adventure had not Tarzancontinually filled his mind with alluring pictures of the great stores of foodwhich were to be found in the village of Tarmangani.</p>
			<p>Taglat nursed his secret purpose to better advantage than might have beenexpected of an ape, yet there were times when he, too, would have abandoned theadventure had not Tarzan cajoled him on.</p>
			<p>It was mid-afternoon of a sultry, tropical day when the keen senses of thethree warned them of the proximity of the Arab camp. Stealthily theyapproached, keeping to the dense tangle of growing things which madeconcealment easy to their uncanny jungle craft.</p>
			<p>First came the giant ape-man, his smooth, brown skin glistening with the sweatof exertion in the close, hot confines of the jungle. Behind him crept Chulkand Taglat, grotesque and shaggy caricatures of their godlike leader.</p>
			<p>Silently they made their way to the edge of the clearing which surrounded thepalisade, and here they clambered into the lower branches of a large treeoverlooking the village occupied by the enemy, the better to spy upon hisgoings and comings.</p>
			<p>A horseman, white burnoosed, rode out through the gateway of the village.Tarzan, whispering to Chulk and Taglat to remain where they were, swung, monkey-like, through the trees in the direction of the trail the Arab wasriding. From one jungle giant to the next he sped with the rapidity of asquirrel and the silence of a ghost.</p>
			<p>The Arab rode slowly onward, unconscious of the danger hovering in the treesbehind him. The ape-man made a slight detour and increased his speed until hehad reached a point upon the trail in advance of the horseman. Here he haltedupon a leafy bough which overhung the narrow, jungle trail. On came the victim, humming a wild air of the great desert land of the north. Above him poised thesavage brute that was today bent upon the destruction of a human life⁠—thesame creature who a few months before, had occupied his seat in the House ofLords at London, a respected and distinguished member of that august body.</p>
			<p>The Arab passed beneath the overhanging bough, there was a slight rustling ofthe leaves above, the horse snorted and plunged as a brown-skinned creaturedropped upon its rump. A pair of mighty arms encircled the Arab and he wasdragged from his saddle to the trail.</p>
			<p>Ten minutes later the ape-man, carrying the outer garments of an Arab bundledbeneath an arm, rejoined his companions. He exhibited his trophies to them, explaining in low gutturals the details of his exploit. Chulk and Taglatfingered the fabrics, smelled of them, and, placing them to their ears, triedto listen to them.</p>
			<p>Then Tarzan led them back through the jungle to the trail, where the three hidthemselves and waited. Nor had they long to wait before two of AchmetZek’s blacks, clothed in habiliments similar to their master’s, came down the trail on foot, returning to the camp.</p>
			<p>One moment they were laughing and talking together⁠—the next they laystretched in death upon the trail, three mighty engines of destruction bendingover them. Tarzan removed their outer garments as he had removed those of hisfirst victim, and again retired with Chulk and Taglat to the greater seclusionof the tree they had first selected.</p>
			<p>Here the ape-man arranged the garments upon his shaggy fellows and himself, until, at a distance, it might have appeared that three white-robed Arabssquatted silently among the branches of the forest.</p>
			<p>Until dark they remained where they were, for from his point of vantage, Tarzancould view the enclosure within the palisade. He marked the position of the hutin which he had first discovered the scent spoor of the she he sought. He sawthe two sentries standing before its doorway, and he located the habitation ofAchmet Zek, where something told him he would most likely find the missingpouch and pebbles.</p>
			<p>Chulk and Taglat were, at first, greatly interested in their wonderful raiment.They fingered the fabric, smelled of it, and regarded each other intently withevery mark of satisfaction and pride. Chulk, a humorist in his way, stretchedforth a long and hairy arm, and grasping the hood of Taglat’s burnoosepulled it down over the latter’s eyes, extinguishing him, snuffer-like, as it were.</p>
			<p>The older ape, pessimistic by nature, recognized no such thing as humor.Creatures laid their paws upon him for but two things⁠—to search for fleasand to attack. The pulling of the Tarmangani-scented thing about his head andeyes could not be for the performance of the former act; therefore it must bethe latter. He was attacked! Chulk had attacked him.</p>
			<p>With a snarl he was at the other’s throat, not even waiting to lift thewoolen veil which obscured his vision. Tarzan leaped upon the two, and swayingand toppling upon their insecure perch the three great beasts tussled andsnapped at one another until the ape-man finally succeeded in separating theenraged anthropoids.</p>
			<p>As apology is unknown to these savage progenitors of man, and explanation alaborious and usually futile process, Tarzan bridged the dangerous gulf bydistracting their attention from their altercation to a consideration of theirplans for the immediate future. Accustomed to frequent arguments in which morehair than blood is wasted, the apes speedily forget such trivial encounters, and presently Chulk and Taglat were again squatting in close proximity to eachother and peaceful repose, awaiting the moment when the ape-man should leadthem into the village of the Tarmangani.</p>
			<p>It was long after darkness had fallen, that Tarzan led his companions fromtheir hiding place in the tree to the ground and around the palisade to the farside of the village.</p>
			<p>Gathering the skirts of his burnoose, beneath one arm, that his legs might havefree action, the ape-man took a short running start, and scrambled to the topof the barrier. Fearing lest the apes should rend their garments to shreds in asimilar attempt, he had directed them to wait below for him, and himselfsecurely perched upon the summit of the palisade he unslung his spear andlowered one end of it to Chulk.</p>
			<p>The ape seized it, and while Tarzan held tightly to the upper end, theanthropoid climbed quickly up the shaft until with one paw he grasped the topof the wall. To scramble then to Tarzan’s side was the work of but aninstant. In like manner Taglat was conducted to their sides, and a moment laterthe three dropped silently within the enclosure.</p>
			<p>Tarzan led them first to the rear of the hut in which Jane Clayton wasconfined, where, through the roughly repaired aperture in the wall, he soughtwith his sensitive nostrils for proof that the she he had come for was within.</p>
			<p>Chulk and Taglat, their hairy faces pressed close to that of the patrician, sniffed with him. Each caught the scent spoor of the woman within, and eachreacted according to his temperament and his habits of thought.</p>
			<p>It left Chulk indifferent. The she was for Tarzan⁠—all that he desired wasto bury his snout in the foodstuffs of the Tarmangani. He had come to eat hisfill without labor⁠—Tarzan had told him that that should be his reward, and he was satisfied.</p>
			<p>But Taglat’s wicked, bloodshot eyes, narrowed to the realization of thenearing fulfillment of his carefully nursed plan. It is true that sometimesduring the several days that had elapsed since they had set out upon theirexpedition it had been difficult for Taglat to hold his idea uppermost in hismind, and on several occasions he had completely forgotten it, until Tarzan, bya chance word, had recalled it to him, but, for an ape, Taglat had done well.</p>
			<p>Now, he licked his chops, and he made a sickening, sucking noise with hisflabby lips as he drew in his breath.</p>
			<p>Satisfied that the she was where he had hoped to find her, Tarzan led his apestoward the tent of Achmet Zek. A passing Arab and two slaves saw them, but thenight was dark and the white burnooses hid the hairy limbs of the apes and thegiant figure of their leader, so that the three, by squatting down as though inconversation, were passed by, unsuspected. To the rear of the tent they madetheir way. Within, Achmet Zek conversed with several of his lieutenants.Without, Tarzan listened.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
