<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>CHAPTER IX.The Theft of the Jewels</h2>
			<p>For two days Werper sought for the party that had accompanied him from the campto the barrier cliffs; but not until late in the afternoon of the second daydid he find clew to its whereabouts, and then in such gruesome form that he wastotally unnerved by the sight.</p>
			<p>In an open glade he came upon the bodies of three of the blacks, terriblymutilated, nor did it require considerable deductive power to explain theirmurder. Of the little party only these three had not been slaves. The others,evidently tempted to hope for freedom from their cruel Arab master, had takenadvantage of their separation from the main camp, to slay the threerepresentatives of the hated power which held them in slavery, and vanish intothe jungle.</p>
			<p>Cold sweat exuded from Werper’s forehead as he contemplated the fatewhich chance had permitted him to escape, for had he been present when theconspiracy bore fruit, he, too, must have been of the garnered.</p>
			<p>Tarzan showed not the slightest surprise or interest in the discovery. Inherentin him was a calloused familiarity with violent death. The refinements of hisrecent civilization expunged by the force of the sad calamity which hadbefallen him, left only the primitive sensibilities which his childhood’straining had imprinted indelibly upon the fabric of his mind.</p>
			<p>The training of Kala, the examples and precepts of Kerchak, of Tublat, and ofTerkoz now formed the basis of his every thought and action. He retained amechanical knowledge of French and English speech. Werper had spoken to him inFrench, and Tarzan had replied in the same tongue without conscious realizationthat he had departed from the anthropoidal speech in which he had addressed La.Had Werper used English, the result would have been the same.</p>
			<p>Again, that night, as the two sat before their camp fire, Tarzan played withhis shining baubles. Werper asked him what they were and where he had foundthem. The ape-man replied that they were gay-colored stones, with which hepurposed fashioning a necklace, and that he had found them far beneath thesacrificial court of the temple of the Flaming God.</p>
			<p>Werper was relieved to find that Tarzan had no conception of the value of thegems. This would make it easier for the Belgian to obtain possession of them.Possibly the man would give them to him for the asking. Werper reached out hishand toward the little pile that Tarzan had arranged upon a piece of flat woodbefore him.</p>
			<p>“Let me see them,” said the Belgian.</p>
			<p>Tarzan placed a large palm over his treasure. He bared his fighting fangs, andgrowled. Werper withdrew his hand more quickly than he had advanced it. Tarzanresumed his playing with the gems, and his conversation with Werper as thoughnothing unusual had occurred. He had but exhibited the beast’s jealousprotective instinct for a possession. When he killed he shared the meat withWerper; but had Werper ever, by accident, laid a hand upon Tarzan’sshare, he would have aroused the same savage, and resentful warning.</p>
			<p>From that occurrence dated the beginning of a great fear in the breast of theBelgian for his savage companion. He had never understood the transformationthat had been wrought in Tarzan by the blow upon his head, other than toattribute it to a form of amnesia. That Tarzan had once been, in truth, asavage, jungle beast, Werper had not known, and so, of course, he could notguess that the man had reverted to the state in which his childhood and youngmanhood had been spent.</p>
			<p>Now Werper saw in the Englishman a dangerous maniac, whom the slightestuntoward accident might turn upon him with rending fangs. Not for a moment didWerper attempt to delude himself into the belief that he could defend himselfsuccessfully against an attack by the ape-man. His one hope lay in eluding him,and making for the far distant camp of Achmet Zek as rapidly as he could; butarmed only with the sacrificial knife, Werper shrank from attempting thejourney through the jungle. Tarzan constituted a protection that was by nomeans despicable, even in the face of the larger carnivora, as Werper hadreason to acknowledge from the evidence he had witnessed in the Oparian temple.</p>
			<p>Too, Werper had his covetous soul set upon the pouch of gems, and so he wastorn between the various emotions of avarice and fear. But avarice it was thatburned most strongly in his breast, to the end that he dared the dangers andsuffered the terrors of constant association with him he thought a mad man,rather than give up the hope of obtaining possession of the fortune which thecontents of the little pouch represented.</p>
			<p>Achmet Zek should know nothing of these—these would be for Werper alone,and so soon as he could encompass his design he would reach the coast and takepassage for America, where he could conceal himself beneath the veil of a newidentity and enjoy to some measure the fruits of his theft. He had it allplanned out, did Lieutenant Albert Werper, living in anticipation the luxuriouslife of the idle rich. He even found himself regretting that America was soprovincial, and that nowhere in the new world was a city that might comparewith his beloved Brussels.</p>
			<p>It was upon the third day of their progress from Opar that the keen ears ofTarzan caught the sound of men behind them. Werper heard nothing above thehumming of the jungle insects, and the chattering life of the lesser monkeysand the birds.</p>
			<p>For a time Tarzan stood in statuesque silence, listening, his sensitivenostrils dilating as he assayed each passing breeze. Then he withdrew Werperinto the concealment of thick brush, and waited. Presently, along the gametrail that Werper and Tarzan had been following, there came in sight a sleek,black warrior, alert and watchful.</p>
			<p>In single file behind him, there followed, one after another, near fiftyothers, each burdened with two dull-yellow ingots lashed upon his back. Werperrecognized the party immediately as that which had accompanied Tarzan on hisjourney to Opar. He glanced at the ape-man; but in the savage, watchful eyes hesaw no recognition of Basuli and those other loyal Waziri.</p>
			<p>When all had passed, Tarzan rose and emerged from concealment. He looked downthe trail in the direction the party had gone. Then he turned to Werper.</p>
			<p>“We will follow and slay them,” he said.</p>
			<p>“Why?” asked the Belgian.</p>
			<p>“They are black,” explained Tarzan. “It was a black whokilled Kala. They are the enemies of the Manganis.”</p>
			<p>Werper did not relish the idea of engaging in a battle with Basuli and hisfierce fighting men. And, again, he had welcomed the sight of them returningtoward the Greystoke bungalow, for he had begun to have doubts as to hisability to retrace his steps to the Waziri country. Tarzan, he knew, had notthe remotest idea of whither they were going. By keeping at a safe distancebehind the laden warriors, they would have no difficulty in following themhome. Once at the bungalow, Werper knew the way to the camp of Achmet Zek.There was still another reason why he did not wish to interfere with theWaziri—they were bearing the great burden of treasure in the direction hewished it borne. The farther they took it, the less the distance that he andAchmet Zek would have to transport it.</p>
			<p>He argued with the ape-man therefore, against the latter’s desire toexterminate the blacks, and at last he prevailed upon Tarzan to follow them inpeace, saying that he was sure they would lead them out of the forest into arich country, teeming with game.</p>
			<p>It was many marches from Opar to the Waziri country; but at last came the hourwhen Tarzan and the Belgian, following the trail of the warriors, topped thelast rise, and saw before them the broad Waziri plain, the winding river, andthe distant forests to the north and west.</p>
			<p>A mile or more ahead of them, the line of warriors was creeping like a giantcaterpillar through the tall grasses of the plain. Beyond, grazing herds ofzebra, hartebeest, and topi dotted the level landscape, while closer to theriver a bull buffalo, his head and shoulders protruding from the reeds watchedthe advancing blacks for a moment, only to turn at last and disappear into thesafety of his dank and gloomy retreat.</p>
			<p>Tarzan looked out across the familiar vista with no faintest gleam ofrecognition in his eyes. He saw the game animals, and his mouth watered; but hedid not look in the direction of his bungalow. Werper, however, did. A puzzledexpression entered the Belgian’s eyes. He shaded them with his palms andgazed long and earnestly toward the spot where the bungalow had stood. He couldnot credit the testimony of his eyes—there was no bungalow—nobarns—no out-houses. The corrals, the hay stacks—all were gone.What could it mean?</p>
			<p>And then, slowly there filtered into Werper’s consciousness anexplanation of the havoc that had been wrought in that peaceful valley sincelast his eyes had rested upon it—Achmet Zek had been there!</p>
			<p>Basuli and his warriors had noted the devastation the moment they had come insight of the farm. Now they hastened on toward it talking excitedly amongthemselves in animated speculation upon the cause and meaning of thecatastrophe.</p>
			<p>When, at last they crossed the trampled garden and stood before the charredruins of their master’s bungalow, their greatest fears became convictionsin the light of the evidence about them.</p>
			<p>Remnants of human dead, half devoured by prowling hyenas and others of thecarnivora which infested the region, lay rotting upon the ground, and among thecorpses remained sufficient remnants of their clothing and ornaments to makeclear to Basuli the frightful story of the disaster that had befallen hismaster’s house.</p>
			<p>“The Arabs,” he said, as his men clustered about him.</p>
			<p>The Waziri gazed about in mute rage for several minutes. Everywhere theyencountered only further evidence of the ruthlessness of the cruel enemy thathad come during the Great Bwana’s absence and laid waste his property.</p>
			<p>“What did they with ‘Lady’?” asked one of the blacks.</p>
			<p>They had always called Lady Greystoke thus.</p>
			<p>“The women they would have taken with them,” said Basuli.“Our women and his.”</p>
			<p>A giant black raised his spear above his head, and gave voice to a savage cryof rage and hate. The others followed his example. Basuli silenced them with agesture.</p>
			<p>“This is no time for useless noises of the mouth,” he said.“The Great Bwana has taught us that it is acts by which things are done,not words. Let us save our breath—we shall need it all to follow up theArabs and slay them. If ‘Lady’ and our women live the greater theneed of haste, and warriors cannot travel fast upon empty lungs.”</p>
			<p>From the shelter of the reeds along the river, Werper and Tarzan watched theblacks. They saw them dig a trench with their knives and fingers. They saw themlay their yellow burdens in it and scoop the overturned earth back over thetops of the ingots.</p>
			<p>Tarzan seemed little interested, after Werper had assured him that that whichthey buried was not good to eat; but Werper was intensely interested. He wouldhave given much had he had his own followers with him, that he might take awaythe treasure as soon as the blacks left, for he was sure that they would leavethis scene of desolation and death as soon as possible.</p>
			<p>The treasure buried, the blacks removed themselves a short distance up windfrom the fetid corpses, where they made camp, that they might rest beforesetting out in pursuit of the Arabs. It was already dusk. Werper and Tarzan satdevouring some pieces of meat they had brought from their last camp. TheBelgian was occupied with his plans for the immediate future. He was positivethat the Waziri would pursue Achmet Zek, for he knew enough of savage warfare,and of the characteristics of the Arabs and their degraded followers to guessthat they had carried the Waziri women off into slavery. This alone wouldassure immediate pursuit by so warlike a people as the Waziri.</p>
			<p>Werper felt that he should find the means and the opportunity to push on ahead,that he might warn Achmet Zek of the coming of Basuli, and also of the locationof the buried treasure. What the Arab would now do with Lady Greystoke, in viewof the mental affliction of her husband, Werper neither knew nor cared. It wasenough that the golden treasure buried upon the site of the burned bungalow wasinfinitely more valuable than any ransom that would have occurred even to theavaricious mind of the Arab, and if Werper could persuade the raider to shareeven a portion of it with him he would be well satisfied.</p>
			<p>But by far the most important consideration, to Werper, at least, was theincalculably valuable treasure in the little leathern pouch at Tarzan’sside. If he could but obtain possession of this! He must! He would!</p>
			<p>His eyes wandered to the object of his greed. They measured Tarzan’sgiant frame, and rested upon the rounded muscles of his arms. It was hopeless.What could he, Werper, hope to accomplish, other than his own death, by anattempt to wrest the gems from their savage owner?</p>
			<p>Disconsolate, Werper threw himself upon his side. His head was pillowed on onearm, the other rested across his face in such a way that his eyes were hiddenfrom the ape-man, though one of them was fastened upon him from beneath theshadow of the Belgian’s forearm. For a time he lay thus, glowering atTarzan, and originating schemes for plundering him of histreasure—schemes that were discarded as futile as rapidly as they wereborn.</p>
			<p>Tarzan presently let his own eyes rest upon Werper. The Belgian saw that he wasbeing watched, and lay very still. After a few moments he simulated the regularbreathing of deep slumber.</p>
			<p>Tarzan had been thinking. He had seen the Waziri bury their belongings. Werperhad told him that they were hiding them lest some one find them and take themaway. This seemed to Tarzan a splendid plan for safeguarding valuables. SinceWerper had evinced a desire to possess his glittering pebbles, Tarzan, with thesuspicions of a savage, had guarded the baubles, of whose worth he was entirelyignorant, as zealously as though they spelled life or death to him.</p>
			<p>For a long time the ape-man sat watching his companion. At last, convinced thathe slept, Tarzan withdrew his hunting knife and commenced to dig a hole in theground before him. With the blade he loosened up the earth, and with his handshe scooped it out until he had excavated a little cavity a few inches indiameter, and five or six inches in depth. Into this he placed the pouch ofjewels. Werper almost forgot to breathe after the fashion of a sleeper as hesaw what the ape-man was doing—he scarce repressed an ejaculation ofsatisfaction.</p>
			<p>Tarzan become suddenly rigid as his keen ears noted the cessation of theregular inspirations and expirations of his companion. His narrowed eyes boredstraight down upon the Belgian. Werper felt that he was lost—he must riskall on his ability to carry on the deception. He sighed, threw both armsoutward, and turned over on his back mumbling as though in the throes of a baddream. A moment later he resumed the regular breathing.</p>
			<p>Now he could not watch Tarzan, but he was sure that the man sat for a long timelooking at him. Then, faintly, Werper heard the other’s hands scrapingdirt, and later patting it down. He knew then that the jewels were buried.</p>
			<p>It was an hour before Werper moved again, then he rolled over facing Tarzan andopened his eyes. The ape-man slept. By reaching out his hand Werper could touchthe spot where the pouch was buried.</p>
			<p>For a long time he lay watching and listening. He moved about, making morenoise than necessary, yet Tarzan did not awaken. He drew the sacrificial knifefrom his belt, and plunged it into the ground. Tarzan did not move. Cautiouslythe Belgian pushed the blade downward through the loose earth above the pouch.He felt the point touch the soft, tough fabric of the leather. Then he prieddown upon the handle. Slowly the little mound of loose earth rose and parted.An instant later a corner of the pouch came into view. Werper pulled it fromits hiding place, and tucked it in his shirt. Then he refilled the hole andpressed the dirt carefully down as it had been before.</p>
			<p>Greed had prompted him to an act, the discovery of which by his companion couldlead only to the most frightful consequences for Werper. Already he couldalmost feel those strong, white fangs burying themselves in his neck. Heshuddered. Far out across the plain a leopard screamed, and in the dense reedsbehind him some great beast moved on padded feet.</p>
			<p>Werper feared these prowlers of the night; but infinitely more he feared thejust wrath of the human beast sleeping at his side. With utmost caution theBelgian arose. Tarzan did not move. Werper took a few steps toward the plainand the distant forest to the northwest, then he paused and fingered the hiltof the long knife in his belt. He turned and looked down upon the sleeper.</p>
			<p>“Why not?” he mused. “Then I should be safe.”</p>
			<p>He returned and bent above the ape-man. Clutched tightly in his hand was thesacrificial knife of the High Priestess of the Flaming God!</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
